Quantum spatial search on planar networks
Przemyslaw Sadowski∗

arXiv:1406.0339v2 [quant-ph] 12 Jun 2015

Institute of Theoretical and Applied Informatics,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Baltycka 5, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland
This paper deals with the problem of the requirements for quantum systems that enable one to
design efficient quantum algorithms. We rise the issue of the possibility to utilise the non-complete
networks for algorithmic purposes. In particular we consider applications for the spatial search
problems. We focus on showing that the asymptotic complexity widely discussed in the related
work is not enough tool for determining the potential of the network. We provide an example of a
network where the asymptotic complexity is the same for a variety of cases and yet it is not always
possible to implement successful search procedure within the quantum walk scheme.
The examples are based on an Apollonian network which models a variety of iteratively generated
planar networks. The network is planar, exhibits linear growth of edges number, consists nodes of
different degrees and has the small-world and scale-free properties. This motivates its analysis due
to the simplicity in terms of connections density and potential for quantum phenomena due to the
nodes diversity.
PACS numbers: 03.67.Ac; 03.65.Aa; 03.67.Lx; 02.10.Ox; 89.75.Fb
Keywords: Quantum walk; Quantum search algorithm; Apollonian networks

I.

INTRODUCTION

One of the key motivations for the development of
quantum information theory is the possibility to utilize quantum systems for computational purposes. Main
progress in this field has been done since two most known
algorithms were introduced – Grover’s search and Shor’s
factorization algorithms. In this work we study the issue of the of computational resources necessary to perform effective computational tasks in quantum systems.
The issue has been studied in terms of the possible interactions represented by a connection graph [1–3], most
commonly within quantum walk notation [4].
The original Grover’s search algorithm corresponds to
an underlying complete graph of connections [4]. Related
results considering the quantum search on less complex
networks are based on such graphs as hypercubes 2n [5],
twisted toroids [6], Hanoi networks [7] and other. These
graphs are not planar. Moreover, the networks exhibit
high symmetry and in particular in each of the cases all
of the nodes can be considered equivalent. The results
regarding the effectiveness of the quantum walk search
on general networks are based on asymptotic complexity
analysis [8].
Our goal is to find a network suitable for efficient computation with properties similar to the 2-dimensional grid
which is planar and sparse. We turn our attention onto
iteratively generated planar networks. For this purpose
we study Apollonian networks. These networks are planar and the average node degree converges to a constant
number. Additionally, the nodes in the network are not
equivalent (even in the case of the last generation nodes
only), what could allow quantum phenomena to occur [9].

∗ psadowski@iitis.pl

In this work we focus on showing that the asymptotic
search complexity is not enough to determine the possibility to successfully implement search algorithm and
when it is possible to efficiently utilise Apollonian network for search purposes. In particular, we consider two
cases of possible marked nodes location regions and show
that they lead to the same asymptotic results. However,
when we consider the possibility to implement the search
with single measurement we show that the basic search
approach fails but the appropriate use of the symmetry in
the network allows us to maintain the optimal quantum
search speed-up.

A.

Apollonian networks

We focus on an example of highly symmetric iteratively generated planar network – Apollonian network –
an undirected graph constructed during the process of
filling the plane with circles [10, 11]. Namely, we consider a graph representing connections between the circles. Each node represents one circle and is connected
with nodes that represent neighbouring circles. While
adding new circle to the plane a new node is created with
appropriate connections. Equivalently it can be defined
as the result of subdivision of a triangle into smaller triangles, which is the case of three initial circles on the plane.
The model is also considered with various modifications.
In particular random Apollonian networks are created
by dividing only a number of triangles in the network.
A model defined this way can be used to describe a vast
variety of iteratively generated planar networks. Any iteratively generated family of planar networks where each
new node created during creation process is connected
with all possible neighbours can be considered as Apollonian network. Apollonian networks have attracted extensive attention in the field of studying large complex

2
discuss possibility to implement the search with a single measurement. We consider two cases and provide a
comparison.
A.

The model for the quantum walk algorithm

Quantum walks model has been introduced as a modification of classical random walks [13]. Most attention
was paid to quantum walks on a line, a lattice and other
regular graphs [14–16].
In the usual quantum walk model we consider a bipartite system HC ⊗ HP . Every step of the evolution U is a
composition of coin and shift operators
|ψt+1 i = U |ψt i = S(C ⊗ 1l)|ψt i,

FIG. 1: Correspondence between filling a plane with
circles and generating an Apollonian network.

networks due to their small-world and scale-free properties. For more detailed analysis of the properties of
Apollonian networks we refer to [12].
The main motivation to execute spatial search algorithm on Apollonian network is the network complexity.
Basic version of the Grover’s algorithm requires a complete network to run [4]. This means
that the system with

N
N positions must support 2 = N (N − 1)/2 = O(N 2 )
interactions. Additionally, the degree of all nodes is equal
to N − 1.
In the case of Apollonian network the total number of
connections increases linearly and is equal to
Edges(N ) = 2 +

K
X
k=0

3
3k = (3K + 1) = O(N ),
2

(1)

where the number of nodes in the network N is related
to the generation K of the network by the formula

where |ψ0 i ∈ HC ⊗ HP is the initial state. In this case
the coin operator acts on the internal state subspace.
Because we consider a regular structure the internal state
space is the same for each position. Thus, the overall
operator can be represented as a tensor product.
When the considered network is not regular we need to
modify the usual product space model. We consider all
the possible pairs (j, i), where node i is connected to node
j. Let us denote the degrees of all of the nodes in the
network by d1 , ..., dN such that the degree of i-th node
is equal
P to di . We construct a space of dimension equal
to
di with basis vectors {|j, ii}i−̃j , where −̃ denotes
the relation between joined nodes. The space can be
represented as a direct sum of subspaces corresponding
to the subsequent nodes. We attribute every position i
with a space Di = Cdi and consider a quantum system
defined as
X = D0 ⊕ · · · ⊕ DN −1 .

(2)

(4)

We denote basis states by |j, ii = 00 ⊕ . . . ⊕ 0i−1 ⊕ |ji ⊕
0i+1 ⊕ . . . ⊕ 0N −1 which represent a state with position
equal to i directed to node j. The shift operator in this
walk is defined as
XX
S=
|j, iihi, j|.
(5)
i

1
N = (3K + 5).
2

(3)

j −̃i

Additionally, maximum node degree in the network is

Additionally, before each shift the coin operator is applied. In the general case, when Ci denotes the coin
operator for i-th node, the overall operator denotes

dmax (N ) = 3 · 2K−1 = O(N log3 2 ) ≈ O(N 0.63 )

C = C0 ⊕ C1 ⊕ . . . ⊕ CN −1 .

while the average node degree is equal to (6 − 3K24+5 ) and
converges to 6.

In order to execute the walk performing the search procedure we set Ci = Gdi , where Gd is a d-dimensional
Grover’s diffusion operator
 
2
GN =
− 1l.
(7)
N i,j

II.

QUANTUM WALK SEARCH ON
APOLLONIAN NETWORK

In this section we aim at introducing a quantum walk
model. We consider asymptotic search complexity and

(6)

The only exception is the marked node where the coin
operator is multiplied by (−1) such that Cm = −Gdm .

3
In this work for the search purposes we assume that the
initial state |ψ0 i is an equal superposition over a fixed set
of basis states. In particular we consider the whole basis
and the states with position representing nodes form the
last generation of a given network.

B.

Asymptotic complexity

In this section we recall the results that imply that
searching for an arbitrary node in a network within the
introduced√quantum walk model is possible with complexity O( N ). We stress that this results do not give
any formula for the exact time step to perform the measurement and consider each of the marked states separately thus do not determine whether it is possible to
choose a common measurement step time that succeeds
for marking any of the nodes.
Lemma 1 (Lemma 3 in [8]) Let H be a finite dimensional Hilbert space and |ψ1 i, . . . , |ψm i be an orthonormal basis for H. Let |ψgood i, |ψstart i be two states in H
which are superpositions of |ψ1 i, ..., |ψm i with real amplitudes and hψgood |ψstart i = α. Let U1 , U2 be unitary
transformations on H with the following properties:
1. U1 is the transformation that flips the phase on
|ψgood i (U1 |ψgood i = −|ψgood i and leaves any state
orthogonal to |ψgood i unchanged.
2. U2 is a transformation which is described by a realvalued m × m matrix in the basis |ψ1 i, ..., |ψm i.
Moreover, U2 |ψstart i = |ψstart i and, if |ψi is an
eigenvector of U2 perpendicular to |ψstart i, then
U2 |ψi = eiθ |ψi for θ ∈ [σ, 2π − σ] (where σ is a
constant, σ > 0)
Then, there exists t
=
O(1/α) such that
|hψgood |(U2 U1 )t |ψstart i| = Ω(1). (The constant under Ω(1) is independent of α but can depend on σ.)
In this paper we consider the space given in Eq. (4)
with basis states {|j, ii} and operators U1 = Om , U2 =
SC which are real in the considered basis. The operator
Om satisfies property 1 trivially. We prove property 2 for
the operator SC on a restricted state space with use of
the following fact.
Fact 1 Lets denote the subspace spanned by the λeigenvectors of U2 for λ 6= 1 by X1 . The subspace X 0 < X
spanned by the states from X1 ∪ {|ψstart i} satisfies:
a) |ψstart i ∈ X 0 ,
b) |tm i ∈ X 0 , m = 1, . . . , N ,
c) SCOm |ψi ∈ X 0 , for |ψi ∈ X 0 , m = 1, . . . , N .
Pt. a) is satisfied trivially. The marked state |tm i
belongs to X 0 because is is assumed to be a local equal
superposition. The states not included in X 0 are exactly

1-eigenvectors orthogonal to the initial state and can be
expressed as states that are orthogonal to any local equal
superposition. It follows from the fact that the U2 operator is a composition of two operators that exhibits only
±1 eigenvalues. Thus, any 1-eigenvector of U2 is a common 1 (or -1) eigenvector of S and C. The initial state is
the only common 1 eigenvector. Common -1 eigenvectors
are in particular -1 eigenvectors of the Grover’s diffusion
operator and thus are locally orthogonal to any possible
target state. Pt. c) is a consequence of the two. We can
now consider the operators O and SC in the X 0 space so
that the condition 2 is met.
The proposed method works for any network if the
applied operators are constructed the same way.
Fact 2 The number of steps required to find any marked
state using procedure described√in section II A adopted for
any Apollonian network is O( N ).
We showed that searching for any marked node in the
Apollonian √
network with the introduced search model
requires O( N ) steps. The above results suggest that
regardless to the set selection the search complexity is
optimal. In the following section we will consider various
approaches to the search problem with different sets of
nodes that can be marked.
C.

Measurement step

Obtaining an effective search algorithm requires translating the final state into classical information about the
result. In the case of quantum systems it is performed
by a measurement. The decision about making a measurement needs to be made without any knowledge about
the searched node. Thus, it is crucial that the designed
algorithm enables us to obtain high success probability
for every possible node in the same step of the evolution.
In the case of the original Grover’s search it is satisfied
due to completely symmetric network structure. When
using less complex networks we need to ensure that regardless of the localization of the marked node algorithm
efficiency is maintained with use of exactly the same operations.
In this work we aim for analysis of iteratively generated
planar networks. We showed that the asymptotic complexity of the search is the same for all of the nodes. In
particular, we provide an example of the 8th generation
Apollonian network case. Contrary to the asymptotic
results, the numerical results show that for nodes from
different generations of the network the optimal measurement time is different. This is caused by the fact that
the asymptotic complexity considers each of the positions
separately and neglects the constant factor of the overall
complexity trend. The numerical results show how this
constant factor differs for various classes of nodes. The
probability of measuring a marked node averaged among
the nodes from the same generation is presented in Fig. 3.
In this case the probability dynamics is very similar for

4

Generation 4
5
6
7
8
Nlast
27
81
243 729 2187
Tp
10
18
32
54
92
√
2 Nlast 10.4 18.0 31.2 54.0 93.5
p(Tp )
0.963 0.965 0.970 0.974 0.977

TABLE I: The average probability p(Tp ) of measuring
the searched node (last generation case) and the
corresponding step Tp for Apollonian networks
generations 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 with number of nodes in the
last generation equal to Nlast .

nodes form the same generation, but the step of optimal
measurement for nodes from different generations varies
significantly. Thus, it is not possible to fix the measurement time such that the algorithm works efficiently when
marking arbitrary node in the network is allowed.
In this work we differentiate the two cases. The search
among all of the nodes and search among nodes form the
last generation. Both cases exhibits the same asymptotic
complexity but only the later allows us to perform successful search with fixed measurement step.
We utilise the fact that for every node created in the
last iteration the success probability is maximal at the
same time step and search with the following algorithm:
1. Prepare a superposition of all nodes from the last
generation.
2. Run quantum walk.
3. Perform a projection onto the subspace of last generation nodes.
4. Measure the position register.
Such approach guarantees that in the moment of measurement the probability of successful search will be maximized regardless of the choice of the marked node. The
projection step can be interpreted as a measurement with
post-selection. The possibility of measuring the desired
subspace is approximately one half as the amplitudes localizes approximately equally in the marked node and
its neighbours. Moreover, if the measurement fails the
state of the systems almost surely evolves into desired
subspace after application of the shift operator. Thus
the complexity of the procedure is not affected by the
projection.

D.

Numerical simulation

Performing the search tasks as described in section II C
one is able to measure the marked node with the probabilities presented in Fig. 4. The maximum probability
and the corresponding steps are presented in Table I.

Let’s note that the number of nodes increases exponentially with generation number
N (K) ≈ 3K .

(8)

As presented in Table I the time of maximum success
probability increases three times every two generations.
For this reason one can assume that the optimal measurement step T0 can be expressed as
√
K
T0 (K) = α3 2 = α( 3)K ,
(9)
where α is a scaling constant. With this assumption and
using Eq. (2) one obtains
√
T0 (N ) ≈ α N .
(10)
This allows us to estimate the complexity of the algorithm as
√
√
E(T0 ) = T0 (N )/p(T0 ) ≈ α N /p = O( N ),
(11)
which induces a quadratic speed-up with respect to the
classical algorithm. Thus, we obtain the optimal speedup rate for a quantum search algorithm with use of an
Apollonian network in the case of the restricted search.
III.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

This work is motivated by the search for simple quantum system structures that are sufficient for efficient computation. We described a quantum walk search procedure on general graph. For the purpose of determining
network computational potential we applied the existing
asymptotic complexity evaluation methods. We showed
that the asymptotic
complexity for the given model is op√
timal – O( N ). The analytical results show that asymptotic complexity is the same for any search scheme. We
focus on showing that the asymptotic complexity is not
enough for determining the potential of the network.
We perform a numerical study in the case of a quantum
walk on Apollonian network. We considered two cases of
the search. We have developed an algorithm that can
be used to search for an arbitrary node and a node from
the last generation of an Apollonian network aiming at
searching with fixed measurement step. The approach
is not possible to adopt for whole network search. We
show numerical evidence that in the restricted search approach it is possible to adopt Grover’s search algorithm
with a measurement time independent from the localization of the marked node while maintaining the efficiency. Numerical results performed for generations 4–8,
that consist of 43–3283 nodes, allowed us suggesting the
estimate of the algorithm complexity which is consistent
with analytical predictions. Provided algorithm exhibits
quadratic speed-up in relation to the classical counterpart.
The presented approach exhibits not only quadratic
speed-up with respect to the classical algorithms, but

5
also allows us to obtain quadratic reduction of the complexity of the network compared to the basic quantum
counterpart by using a network with O(N ) number of
connections instead of O(N 2 ) in the complete network
case.

IV.

of

mond Grant” Programme under the project number 0064/DIA/2013/42 and by the Polish National Science Centre under the project number
2011/03/D/ST6/00413.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is supported by the Polish Ministry
Science and Higher Education within ”Dia-

[1] R. Van Meter and C. Horsman, Communications of the
ACM 56, 84 (2013).
[2] Y. Higuchi, N. Konno, I. Sato, and E. Segawa,
arxiv:quant-ph/1401:0154 (2013).
[3] J. Watrous, Journal of Computer and System Sciences
62, 376 (2001).
[4] R. Portugal, Quantum Walks and Search Algorithms,
Quantum Science and Technology (Springer, 2013), ISBN
9781461463368.
[5] N. Shenvi, J. Kempe, and K. B. Whaley, Physical Review
A 67, 052307 (2003), URL http://link.aps.org/doi/
10.1103/PhysRevA.67.052307.
[6] B. Douglas and J. Wang, Journal of Computational and
Theoretical Nanoscience 10, 1601 (2013).
[7] F. d. L. Marquezino, R. Portugal, and S. Boettcher, Phys.
Rev. A 87, 012329 (2013), URL http://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.87.012329.
[8] A. Ambainis, SIAM Journal on Computing 37, 210
(2007).

[9] M. Faccin, T. Johnson, J. Biamonte, S. Kais, and
P. Migdal, Physical Review X 3, 041007 (2013).
[10] D. Boyd, Canadian J. Math. 25, 303 (1973).
[11] D. Boyd, Mathematika 20, 170 (1973).
[12] J. Doye and C. Massen, Phys. Rev. E 71, 016128 (2005).
[13] Y. Aharonov, L. Davidovich, and N. Zagury, Physical
Review A 48, 1687 (1993).
[14] J. Kempe, Contemporary Physics 44, 307 (2003).
[15] D. Aharonov, A. Ambainis, J. Kempe, and U. Vazirani, in
Conference Proceedings of the Annual ACM Symposium
on Theory of Computing (2001), pp. 50–59, arxiv:quantph/0012090.
[16] A. M. Childs and J. Goldstone, Physical Review A
- Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics 70, 022314
(2004).

6
0

0

3

1

2

1

2

(a) 0th generation

(b) 1st generation

0

0

8
7

6

4

15
6

4

3

3
9

2

(c) 2nd generation

14
11

5
1

13

1

5

12

10

2

(d) 3rd generation

FIG. 2: An illustration of the construction of an Apollonian network. Red squares illustrate the nodes in
the 0th generation, an orange hexagon in the 1st generation, blue circles in the 2nd generation and green pentagons
in the 3rd generation.

7

1.0

Average success pobability

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0

20

40

60

80

100

Time step
FIG. 3: Average probability of measuring the marked node grouped by nodes generations. Blue, green, red, cyan
and magenta lines (dashed, dotted, dash-dotted, dash-dot-dotted, solid) correspond to nodes created in 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
iteration respectively in the 8th generation network.

1.0

Success probability

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0

20

40

Time step

60

80

100

FIG. 4: Average probability of measuring the searched node (if one of the last generation nodes is marked) in
successive steps for network generations: 4 (solid), 5 (dashed), 6 (dotted), 7 (dash-dotted) and 8 (dash-dot-dotted).

