arXiv:2002.04666v2 [math.CO] 24 Jun 2020

Perfect State Transfer on Oriented Graphs
Chris Godsil and Sabrina Lato
June 26, 2020
Abstract
Quantum walks on undirected graphs have been studied using symmetric matrices, such as the adjacency or Laplacian matrix, and many
results about perfect state transfer are known. We extend some of
those results to oriented graphs. We also study the phenomena, unique
to oriented graphs, of multiple state transfer, where there is a set of
vertices such that perfect state transfer occurs between every pair in
that set. We give a characterization of multiple state transfer, and a
new example of a graph where it occurs.

1

Introduction

A continuous quantum walk on a graph is defined by taking some Hermitian
matrix H and considering the time-dependent unitary matrix
U(t) = exp(−itH).
We call U the transition matrix of the walk. In most previous work, H is
chosen to be the adjacency matrix or the Laplacian matrix of an undirected
graph.
Cameron et al [1] considered oriented graphs where every edge is given a
unique direction. We take the adjacency matrix of an oriented graph to be
the matrix A with rows and columns indexed by the vertices of the graph,
and Aa,b equal to 1 if the the edge {a, b} is oriented from a to b, equal to −1
if the the edge {a, b} is oriented from a to b, and equal to zero if a and b are
not adjacent. Consequently A is skew symmetric. If A is a skew symmetric
matrix, then iA is Hermitian and so
U(t) = exp(−it(iA)) = exp(tA)
1

is the transition matrix of a continuous quantum walk. Although U(t) is
real and orthogonal, this defines a continuous quantum walk, not a classical
random walk.
Let ea denote the characteristic vector for the vertex a. We say that
perfect state transfer occurs from vertex a to vertex b if there is some time
τ ∈ R and some complex phase factor λ with norm one such that
U(τ )ea = λeb .
This definition matches that used for unoriented graphs. Our goal in this
paper is to characterize the case where perfect state transfer occurs on an
oriented graph. For undirected graphs (with the adjacency matrix or the
Laplacian as Hamiltonian), Kay [9] showed that for any vertex a in a graph,
there is most one vertex b such that we have perfect state transfer from a to
b. Cameron et al gave two examples of oriented graphs with what they called
universal state transfer, oriented graphs such that for each pair of vertices a
and b, there was perfect state transfer from a to b at some time. Here we
provide an oriented graph on eight vertices with a subset C of four vertices,
such that there is perfect state transfer between any pair of vertices in C.
We call this multiple state transfer.

2

Basic Properties of Quantum Walks

Skew symmetric matrices have some convenient properties, which are standard results from linear algebra and can be found in texts such as Zhang [11].
Among them, the eigenvalues have no real part and are symmetric about the
real axis. Skew symmetric matrices are also normal, and therefore admit a
spectral decomposition as described (for example) in Godsil and Royle [7].
That is, for any skew symmetric matrix A with distinct eigenvalues θ0 , . . . , θd
we may write
d
X
A=
θr Er
r=0

where the spectral idempotents Er represent projection into the θr -eigenspace.
These spectral idempotents are Hermitian, positive semidefinite, pairwise
orthogonal, and sum to the identity. For the skew symmetric case, we have
the further useful property that if θr is an eigenvalue with spectral idempotent
Er , then −θr is an eigenvalue with spectral idempotent Er .
2

Using spectral decomposition, any function f that converges on the spectrum of A can be written
f (A) =

d
X

f (θr )Er .

r=0

In particular,
U(t) =

d
X

etθr Er .

r=0

Details and proofs of these facts are given for symmetric matrices in [7] and
for skew symmetric matrices in [10].
We note that U(t) is real and that
U(t) = U(t)−1 = U(−t).
For unoriented graphs, little is known about the phase factor. All examples of perfect state transfer have a root of unity as the phase factor, but it
is not known whether this is always true [4]. For oriented graphs, we know
something much stronger.
2.1 Lemma. Let X be an oriented graph with perfect state transfer. Then
the phase factor is ±1.
Proof. Suppose there is perfect state transfer from a to b. Then we have
some time τ and some phase factor λ such that U(t)ea = λeb ; since U(t), ea
and eb are real it follows that λ is real. As |λ| = 1, the lemma follows.

In subsequent computations with perfect state transfer, we will use ǫa,b
to denote the phase factor, i.e., if there is perfect state transfer from a to b,
then we write U(t)ea = ǫa,b U(t)eb .

3

Switching Automorphisms

An automorphism of a graph with adjacency matrix A can be viewed as a
permutation matrix P such that
A = P T AP.
A monomial matrix is the product of a permutation matrix with a diagonal matrix. For our purposes, the diagonal matrix will always have entries
3

±1. Note that if P̃ is such a monomial matrix, then P̃ T P̃ = I. A graph X
has a switching automorphism if there exists a monomial matrix P̃ such that
A = P̃ T AP̃ .
We have defined switching automorphisms to be matrices (acting on
CV (X) ), but if a ∈ V (X) and P̃ is a switching, we will sometimes use P̃ a
to denote the vertex such that eP̃ a = P̃ ea .
Cameron et al [1] studied the switching automorphism group of graphs
with universal state transfer. We will go in a different direction, and characterize when perfect state transfer can occur from vertex a to P̃ a for some
switching automorphism P̃ . The first point to note is that switching automorphisms preserve the quantum walk.
3.1 Lemma. Let X be an oriented graph with switching automorphism P̃
and transition matrix U(t). Then
U(t) = P̃ T U(t)P̃ .
Proof. Since P̃ commutes with A, it commutes with U = exp(tA).
This is particularly relevant when there is a switching automorphism
along with perfect state transfer.
3.2 Corollary. Let X be an oriented graph with switching automorphism
P̃ . If X has perfect state transfer from vertex a to vertex b at time τ, then
there is perfect state transfer from P̃ a to P̃ b at the same time τ.
Proof. Since there is perfect state transfer,
U(τ )ea = ±eb .
By Lemma 3.1,
P̃ T U(τ )P̃ ea = ±eb ,
so
U(τ )P̃ ea = ±P̃ eb
and there is perfect state transfer from P̃ a to P̃ b at time τ.

4

0

1

2

Figure 1: One orientation of the complete graph on 3 vertices
3.3 Corollary. Let X be an oriented graph with switching automorphism P̃
such that there is perfect state transfer from vertex a to vertex P̃ a at time τ.
Then for any positive integer n there is perfect state transfer from a to P̃ n a
at time nτ .
Proof. We will prove this by induction. The base case when k = 1 is true
by definition, so let k be a positive integer such that there is perfect state
transfer from a to P̃ k a at time kτ . Then
U((k + 1))τ )ea = U(τ )U(kτ )ea .
By the inductive hypothesis there is perfect state transfer from a to P̃ k a at
time kτ and thus
U(τ )U(kτ )ea = ±U(τ )P̃ k ea .

Since P̃ k is a switching automorphism, by Corollary 3.2 there is perfect state
transfer from P̃ k a to P̃ k+1a at time τ and therefore
±U(τ )P̃ k ea = ±P̃ k+1ea .
Thus there is perfect state transfer from a to P̃ k+1a at time (k + 1)τ .

4

Multiple State Transfer

Kay [9] showed that if a real symmetric matrix has perfect state transfer
from a to some other vertex b, it cannot have perfect state transfer from a
to any vertex other than a. This is not the case with oriented graphs, as the
5

0

3

6

5

2

1

4

7

Figure 2: A New Example of Multiple State Transfer
complete graph on three vertices oriented as in Figure 1 has perfect state
√ and from vertex 0 to 1 at time
transfer from vertex 0 to vertex 1 at time 32π
3
4π
√ .
3 3
Cameron et al [1] studied graphs like this with universal state transfer,
where there is perfect state transfer between every pair of vertices, although
the only known examples are K2 and K3 . Connelly et al [2] conjectured
that these were in fact the only examples of unweighted oriented graphs with
universal state transfer.
We will consider the more general case of multiple state transfer, where
there is a subset of vertices such that every pair of vertices in that subset has
perfect state transfer between them, and are particularly interested in the
non-trivial cases where multiple state transfer occurs between three or more
vertices. The oriented K3 is still an example of graphs with multiple state
transfer, but it is not the only one.
The graph in Figure 2 has multiple state transfer on the set of vertices
{0, 1, 6, 7} . In both this example and in the oriented K3 , there is a switching
automorphism permuting the vertices involved in multiple state transfer. In
this case, determining when multiple state transfer occurs simplifies to determining when perfect state transfer occurs between two vertices determined
by the automorphism.
4.1 Lemma. Let X be an oriented graph with switching automorphism P̃
6

of order n. If perfect state transfer occurs from vertex a to vertex P̃ a, then
there is multiple state transfer on
n
o
n−1
a, P̃ a, . . . , P̃
a .
Proof. Let P̃ k a, P̃ ℓ a be two vertices in the set. By Corollary 3.3, perfect
state transfer occurs from a to P̃ k a at time kτ and from a to P̃ ℓ a at time ℓτ .
Then
U((ℓ − k)τ )P̃ k ea = U(ℓτ )U(−kτ )P̃ k ea
= ±U(ℓτ )ea
= ±P̃ ℓ ea .

Thus there is perfect state transfer from P̃ k a to P̃ ℓ a and, since k and ℓ
were arbitrary, there is multiple state transfer on the set.
For a switching automorphism P̃ and a vertex a, we may adapt the tools
used to study perfect state transfer on unoriented graphs to develop a characterization for when perfect state transfer occurs from a to P̃ a. This allows
us to come up with a characterization of multiple state transfer on the image
under a switching automorphism.

5

Cospectrality

Let a be a vertex. We define the eigenvalue support at a, denoted Φa , to be
the set
{θr : Er ea 6= 0} .

Two vertices a and b are strongly cospectral if for each spectral idempotent
Er with θr ∈ Φa , there exists some complex number αr with |αr | = 1 such
that
Er ea = αr Er eb .

More details about strongly cospectral vertices can be found in Godsil and
Smith [8]. For unoriented graphs, the entries of the spectral idempotents
will be real and thus α = ±1. Additionally, if there is perfect state transfer
between two vertices, they are strongly cospectral and strong cospectrality
is one of several necessary and sufficient conditions for perfect state transfer
to occur, as shown by Coutinho in Chapter 2 of his thesis [3].
7

5.1 Lemma. Let X be an oriented graph with vertices a and b. If there is
perfect state transfer from a to b, then a and b are strongly cospectral.
Proof. Suppose there is perfect state transfer from a to b at time τ. Then for
all eigenvalues θr , we may define the corresponding αr to be either e−τ θr or
−e−τ θr depending on whether the phase factor is plus or minus one.
Because there is perfect state transfer from a to b, we know that
X
X
eτ θr Er ea = ±
Er eb ,
r

r

or equivalently, for all r,
eτ θr Er ea = ±Er eb .
By multiplying by e−τ θr we get
Er ea = ±e−τ θr Er eb = αr Er eb ,
and therefore a and b are strongly cospectral.
If we have perfect state transfer from a to b, it follows from the discussion
above that there is a real number qr (a, b) such that
−1 ≤ qr (a, b) ≤ 1
and
Er ea = eiπqr (a,b) Er eb .
We refer to qr (a, b) as the quarrel from a to b (relative to the eigenvalue θr .)
5.2 Lemma. Let X be an oriented graph with switching automorphism P̃ .
If vertices a and P̃ a are strongly cospectral then, for any positive integer n,
vertices a and P̃ n a are strongly cospectral, and
n

eiπqr (a,P̃ a) = eiπnqr (a,P̃ a) .
Proof. We will prove this by induction. When n = 1, we have
Er ea = eiπqr (a,b) Er P̃ ea ,

8

k
which is the definition. Let k be apositive
 integer such that a and P̃ a are
strongly cospectral, and let q = qr a, P̃ a . Then

Er ea = eiπkq Er P̃ k ea
 k
= eiπkq P̃ k P̃ T Er P̃ k ea
= eiπkq P̃ k Er ea

= eiπ(k+1)q P̃ k Er P̃ ea
 k
= eiπ(k+1)q P̃ k Er P̃ T P̃ k+1 ea
= eiπ(k+1)q Er P̃ k+1ea .

Note that
eTa Er ea = eiπ(k+1)q eTa Er P̃ k+1ea
is a positive real number, and thus
eiπqr (a,P̃

) = eiπ(k+1)q

k+1 a

and therefore a and P̃ k+1a are strongly cospectral with the desired condition
on the quarrel.
We now offer a first characterization of when there will be perfect state
transfer between two vertices. This characterization applies for all graphs,
and is an oriented analogue of Theorem 2.4.2 in [3].
5.3 Theorem. Let X be an oriented graph with vertices a and b. There is
perfect state transfer from a to b if and only if:
(i) Vertices a and b are strongly cospectral.
(ii) There exists some τ ∈ R such that, for all θr ∈ Φa ,
qr (a, b) +

iτ θr
π

is always an even integer or always an odd integer.
Proof. By Lemma 5.1, we may assume a and b are strongly cospectral and
show that perfect state transfer from a to b occurs if and only if (ii) holds.
9

Perfect state transfer occurs if and only if there exists some τ ∈ R and some
phase factor ±1 such that
eτ θr Er ea = ±Er eb = eiπqr (a,b) Er ea .
If the phase factor is 1, this is equivalent to saying that for all θr ∈ Φa ,
eτ θr −iπqr (a,b) = 1,
or there exists some integer kr such that
τ θr − iπqr (a, b) = 2kr iπ.
Multiplying through by πi shows us that perfect state transfer occurs at time
τ with phase factor 1 if and only if
iτ θr
+ qr (a, b)
π
is always an even integer.
Similarly, if the phase factor is −1, then perfect state from a to b at time
τ is equivalent to saying that for all θr ∈ Φa , there exists some integer kr
such that
τ θr − iπqr (a, b) = (2kr + 1) iπ,
or equivalently
iτ θr
+ qr (a, b)
π
is always an odd integer.
This provides us with a first characterization, which applies for all oriented graphs. However, it relies upon knowing at what time perfect state
transfer occurs. In order to deal with this, we consider a closely related but
easier to characterize property of quantum walks.

6

Periodicity

A vertex a in an oriented graph is periodic if there is a time σ such that
U(σ)ea = ±ea . (For general graphs, a vertex is periodic if there is time σ
and a complex scalar γ with norm 1 such that U(σ)ea = γea , further if there
10

is perfect state transfer from a to b, then both vertices a and b are periodic.
For more detail, see [6].)
For oriented graphs with a switching automorphism of order n taking a
to b and perfect state transfer from a to b at time τ , Corollary 3.3 gives a
proof that the vertex a will be periodic at time nτ.
Periodicity is a simpler property than perfect state transfer, and it is
much easier to characterize for both oriented and unoriented graphs. For unoriented graphs, Godsil [5] characterized graphs with periodic vertices based
only on the elements of the eigenvalue support. Here, we prove a similar, but
simpler characterization for oriented graphs.
6.1 Theorem. Let X be a connected oriented graph with at least two vertices. Then the following are equivalent:
(i) The vertex a is periodic.
(ii) For all r, s with θr , θs ∈ Φa and θs 6= 0, the ratio θθrs is rational.
(iii) There exists a √
square-free positive integer ∆ such that all eigenvalues
in Φa are in Z( −∆).
Proof. Suppose that a is a periodic vertex. This is equivalent to saying that
for all θr ∈ Φa ,
eτ θr Er ea = ±Er ea .

In particular, for any θr , θs ∈ Φa where θs 6= 0, this means that eτ θr =
e
= ±1, and therefore τ θr and τ θs are both integer multiples of iπ. It
follows that
θr
τ θr
=
∈ Q.
θs
τ θs
τ θs

Next, suppose that for all r, s with θr ∈ Φa and θs 6= 0, the ratio θθrs is
rational. Since X is connected, we know that
X
θr Er ea = Aea 6= 0,
r

and in particular there must be some θ0 6= 0 in Φa . For all θr ∈ Φa , we know
there exists some rational number mr such that θr = mr θ0 and thus
Y
Y
|Φ |
mr .
θr = θ0 a
θr ∈Φa

θr ∈Φa

11

The eigenvalue support is closed under algebraic conjugates, so any automorphism of the splitting field of the characteristic polynomial of the adjacency matrix fixes
Y
θr .
θr ∈Φa

|Φ |

It follows from field theory that θ0 a ∈ Q, and we may let d be the
minimal integer such that θ0d ∈ Q. Then θ0 has conjugate eigenvalues that
differ by dth roots of unity and, since the eigenvalues of skew symmetric
matrices have no real part, d ≤ 2 and θ02 ∈ Q. Because θ0 is an eigenvalue of
a matrix with integer entries and therefore an algebraic integer, and rational
algebraic integers are integers, we have in fact that θ02 √
∈ Z. Letting ∆ be the
2
largest square-free integer dividing θ0 , we write θ0 = a −∆ for some integer
a.
Then for any θr ∈ Φa , we have
√
θr = amr −∆
and
θr2 = −(amr )2 ∆ ∈ Z.
Since ∆ is square-free, it must
√ be the case that amr ∈ Z, and therefore all
eigenvalues in Φa are in Z( −∆).
Finally, suppose that there exists
√ a square-free positive integer ∆ such
that all eigenvalues in Φa are in Z( −∆). Then
X 2πθ
X
2π
√ r
e ∆ Er ea =
U( √ )ea =
Er ea = ea ,
∆
r
θr ∈Φa
and so a is periodic.
From this characterization, we see that the eigenvalues are sufficient to
determine when a vertex is periodic. They can also tell us the minimum
period, or the first time that a vertex is periodic.
6.2 Lemma. Let X be a connected oriented graph with periodic vertex
a, and √
let ∆ be the square-free positive integer such that for all θr ∈ Φa ,
θr ∈ Z −∆ . Assume



θr
√
g = gcd
.
−∆ θr ∈Φa
12

Then if the phase factor of a is −1, the minimum period is
π
√

g ∆
and if the phase factor is 1, the minimum period is
2π
√
g ∆
Proof. Suppose the minimum period is σ with phase factor −1. Then for all
θr ∈ Φa
eσθr = −1
so
σθr = iπkr
for some odd integer kr . But θr is an imaginary quadratic integer, and so the
smallest that σ can be is g√π∆ .
Similarly, if the minimum period σ has phase factor 1 then for all θr ∈ Φa
eσθr = 1
so
σθr = 2iπkr
2π
.
for some integer kr , so the smallest that σ can be is g√
∆

7

Characterization

Using our earlier characterization and what we know about periodicity, we
can come up with a better characterization of when a vertex has perfect state
transfer to its image under a switching automorphism, similar to Theorem
2.4.4 for nonoriented graphs [3]. This gives a characterization of when multiple state transfer can occur that relies only the spectral decomposition of
the graph, a given switching automorphism, and a vertex in the graph.
7.1 Theorem. Let X be an oriented graph with vertex a, and let P̃ be a
switching automorphism of order n. Then there is multiple state transfer on
the set {a, P̃ a, . . . , P̃ n−1a} if and only if:
13

(i) Vertices a and P̃ a are strongly cospectral.
(ii) Vertex a is periodic.
(iii) Let
g = gcd



Then either

θ
√ r
−∆



θr ∈Φa



.

(a) Vertex a has periodic phase factor −1 and there exists an integer
m < n relatively prime to n such that
θ
√r
+ mqr (a, P̃ a)
ng −∆
is always an odd integer or always an even integer for all θr ∈ Φa .

(b) Vertex a has periodic phase factor 1 and there exists an integer
m < n relatively prime to n such that
2θr
√
+ mqr (a, P̃ a)
ng −∆

is always an odd integer or always an even integer for all θr ∈ Φa .
Proof. If there is multiple state transfer, there is necessarily perfect state
transfer from a to P̃ a. Then by Lemma 5.1 and Lemma 6.1 the first two
conditions hold, so we may assume them and prove that multiple state transfer occurs on the set if and only if (iii) holds. Since a is periodic, it can
either have phase factor −1 or 1. Letting σ denote the minimum period, by
Lemma 6.2, (iii) is equivalent to saying that for some m
σθr
+ mqr (a, P̃ a)
πni
is always an even integer or always an odd integer.
Suppose (iii) holds. By Lemma 5.2, vertices a and P̃ m a are strongly
cospectral and there exists some integer k such that
qr (a, P̃ m a) = mqr (a, P̃ a) − 2k.
Then

σθr
σθr
+ mqr (a, P̃ a) =
− 2k + qr (a, P̃ m a)
πni
πni
14

is always an even integer or always an odd integer, so by Theorem 5.3 there
σ
is perfect state transfer from a and P̃ m a at nπ
. Then by Lemma 4.1, since
m is relatively prime to n there is multiple state transfer on the set
{a, P̃ m a, . . . , P̃ m(n−1) a} = {a, P̃ a, . . . , P̃ n−1a.}
Conversely, suppose that multiple state transfer occurs on this set and for
1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1 let τi be the first time that perfect state transfer occurs from
a to P̃ i a. Note that these will all be distinct times strictly less than σ and
that therefore nτi is a distinct period for each i. Every period is an integer
multiples of the minimum period, therefore nτi is some integer multiple of σ,
and thus the set of minimal perfect state transfer times from a are
nz σ
zn−1 σ o
1
,...,
n
n
where z1 , . . . , zn−1 are n − 1 distinct integers between 1 and n − 1. Therefore
there must be some m such that τm = nσ . Since σ is the minimum period,
m must be relatively prime to n or else P̃ m would be a nontrivial switching
automorphism of order m′ < m and thereforem m′ τm would be a period
strictly less than σ.
By Lemma 5.2, vertices a and P̃ m a are strongly cospectral and there
exists some integer k such that
qr (a, P̃ m a) = 2k + mqr (a, P̃ a).
Therefore by Theorem 5.3, for all θr ∈ Φa
qr (a, P̃ m ) +

iσθr
iτm θr
= mqr (a, b) + 2k +
π
nπ

is always an even integer or always an odd integer, and thus multiple state
transfer implies (iii).

8

Further Questions

The characterization in Theorem 7.1 applies whenever there is perfect state
transfer and a switching automorphism between two vertices. In this case,
the time for perfect state transfer will be a rational multiple of the minimum
15

0

3

4

1

2

Figure 3: Perfect state transfer occurs at an irrational multiple of the period
period, which is itself a rational multiple of √π∆ . However, this is not the
only situation under which perfect state transfer can occur. The graph in
Figure 3 has no switching automorphism between vertices 3 and 4, since the
other three vertices are oriented towards vertex 3 in the same way that they
are oriented towards vertex 4, but there is a single edge oriented from vertex
3 to vertex 4. However, Theorem 5.3 can be used to verify that perfect state
transfer occurs from vertex 3 to vertex 4 at time

π − arccos 34
√
,
7

but arccos 34 is not a rational multiple of π [10]. This example raises several
questions:
• Is it possible to improve the characterization in Theorem 5.3 so that it
does not depend on the time τ while still having it apply to all graphs?
• What is the relationship between the period and the first time to perfect state transfer if a graph does not have a switching automorphism
between the vertices involved in perfect state transfer?
• Are there examples of multiple state transfer that do not arise from
switching automorphisms?

16

References
[1] Cameron, S., Fehrenbach, S., Granger, L., Hennigh, O.,
Shrestha, S., and Tamon, C. Universal state transfer on graphs.
Linear Algebra and Its Applications 455 (2014), 115–142.
[2] Connelly, E., Grammel, N., Kraut, M., Serazo, L., and Tamon, C. Universality in perfect state transfer. Linear Algebra Appl.
531 (2017), 516–532.
[3] Coutinho, G. Quantum State Transfer in Graphs. PhD thesis, University of Waterloo, 2014.
[4] Coutinho, G., and Godsil, C. Continuous Quantum Walks. In
preparation.
[5] Godsil, C. When can perfect state transfer occur?, 2010.
[6] Godsil,
C.
Real
https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.04042.

state

transfer,

2017.

[7] Godsil, C., and Royle, G. Algebraic Graph Theory. Springer-Verlag,
2001.
[8] Godsil, C., and Smith, J. Strongly cospectral vertices, 2017.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1709.07975.
[9] Kay, A. The basics of perfect communication through quantum networks. Physical Review A 84 (2011).
[10] Lato, S. Quantum Walks on Oriented Graphs, 2019. Masters Thesis.
[11] Zhang, F. Matrix Theory, second ed. Universitext. Springer, New
York, 2011. Basic results and techniques.

17

