DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS
AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

CHRISTIAN BICK1,2,∗ , DAVIDE SCLOSA1,⋆

arXiv:2110.13686v3 [math.DS] 26 Feb 2024

1

Department of Mathematics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1111,
1081 HV Amsterdam, the Netherlands
2
Institute for Advanced Study, Technical University of Munich, Lichtenbergstraße
2, 85748 Garching, Germany
e-mail: ∗ c.bick@vu.nl; ⋆ d.sclosa@vu.nl
Abstract. The collective dynamics of interacting dynamical units on a network
crucially depends on the properties of the network structure. Rather than
considering large but finite graphs to capture the network, one often resorts to
graph limits and the dynamics thereon. We elucidate the symmetry properties
of dynamical systems on graph limits—including graphons and graphops—and
analyze how the symmetry shapes the dynamics, for example through invariant
subspaces. In addition to traditional symmetries, dynamics on graph limits
can support generalized noninvertible symmetries. Moreover, as asymmetric
networks can have symmetric limits, we note that one can expect to see ghosts
of symmetries in the dynamics of large but finite asymmetric networks.

1. Introduction
Synchronization and other collective phenomena of networks of interconnected
dynamical systems are crucial in many systems in science and technology, ranging
from interacting neural units to power grid networks [43,47]. The network structure
is often captured by a graph: Each vertex is a dynamical system and two systems
are coupled if they are connected by an edge. Thus, an essential question in
network dynamical systems is how the network structure shapes the collective
network dynamics. Classical dynamical systems tools are of limited use to answer
this question as many relevant network dynamical systems have many nodes—e.g.,
the human brain is a network of billions of individual cells. Thus, a common
approach is to consider continuum limits, such as graphons [31] or graphops [3],
and dynamics on these limit objects (see, e.g., [11, 12, 18, 25, 29, 35, 36]).
In this paper we analyze the symmetry properties of graph limits and the
implications for the network dynamics. Symmetries essentially shape the dynamics,
for example, by inducing invariant subspaces [20] that may correspond to synchrony
patterns [42], or facilitate the emergence of structurally stable heteroclinic cycles [50].
First, we make the notion of symmetries rigorous for dynamics on graph limits; this
leads to some technical challenges compared to the finite-dimensional setting as the
dynamics have to be defined on appropriate spaces where the state of individual
vertices might become irrelevant. Second, we compute the symmetry groups of
several graphons and graphops appearing in the literature, including homogeneous
1

2

CHRISTIAN BICK

networks, multiple populations, and networks on manifolds. Third, we describe
the corresponding effects on dynamics. Fourth, we give some consequences for
large but finite-dimensional systems: As the limit object can have significantly
more symmetries than any finite element of the converging sequence one can expect
“ghosts” of symmetries of the limit object in large but finite network dynamical
systems.
Networks, graphs, and graph limits. A graph provides a natural mathematical abstraction of a network: Two vertices interact if there is an edge between
them. Since many networks of interest have many vertices—e.g., the human brain
mentioned above or the internet as a network of webpages connected by links—it
is often convenient to consider the limit of large graphs. A graph sequence is called
dense if the number of edges grows quadratically with respect to the number of
vertices. The groundbreaking work by Szegedy and Lovász [31] introduces graphons
as limits of dense graph sequences. Graphops have been later introduced to include
both dense and sparse graph sequences [3].
Graph automorphisms describe the symmetries of a graph: These are permutations of vertices that preserve the edges. Here we typically assume graphs to
be finite, undirected, and simple and make it explicit when additional structure
(e.g., weights) is present. In this context, the automorphism group of a cycle
graph is a dihedral group and of a complete graph is the whole permutation group.
While the notion of an automorphism can be extended to graphons as graph limits,
there are some nuances that need to be taken into account [32]. By contrast,
automorphisms—and thus the symmetries—of the more general class of graphops
have rarely been considered.
Dynamical systems and symmetries. Symmetries of a dynamical system are
transformations of phase space that send trajectories to trajectories; see [20, 21]
for an introduction to the subject. To fix some notation, let the flows (X, ΦX )
and (Y, ΦY ) define dynamical systems. A map γ : X → Y maps trajectories to
Y
trajectories if for every x ∈ X and every t ∈ R we have γ(ΦX
t (x)) = Φt (γ(x)).
A symmetry γ of a dynamical system (X, Φ) is a bijection γ : X → X sending
trajectories to trajectories: For every t ∈ R and every x ∈ X we have γ(Φt (x)) =
Φt (γ(x)). Note that being a symmetry is the same as commuting with the flow.
Notice that if γ is a symmetry then its inverse γ −1 is also a symmetry since
γ −1 ◦ Φt = (Φ−t ◦ γ)−1 = Φt ◦ γ −1 and so the symmetries form a group. Typically
one is interested in group of symmetries of a specific type, for example, due to
the physical nature of the system. Symmetries give rise to dynamically invariant
subspaces. It is a general fact that if two maps γ, ν : X → X commute with each
other, then the fixed point set Fix(γ) is ν-invariant and the fixed point set Fix(ν)
is γ-invariant. If γ is a symmetry, this implies that the fixed point set Fix(γ) is
dynamically invariant.
In the case of coupled dynamical systems on a graph, symmetries may be induced
by the underlying combinatorial graph structure independently of the specific
choice of coupling functions. Importantly, symmetry-induced invariant subspaces
may correspond to synchrony patterns, where individual units have the same
state. Thus, computing symmetry groups allows to understand the emergence of
“cluster” dynamics [42]. Moreover, there has been further interest in symmetries of

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

3

network dynamical systems due to symmetry breaking phenomena [6, 26]. However,
symmetry considerations for network dynamical systems typically focus on finitedimensional systems. Elucidating the symmetries of network dynamical systems on
graph limits as well as the implications for the dynamics remain underexplored.
Main contributions. In this paper, we analyze the symmetry properties of graph
limits, their implications for dynamics on such graph limits, and corresponding
large- but finite-dimensional network dynamical systems.
From the perspective of network structure alone, we focus on the automorphism
group of graphons that are common in literature. These include constant graphons
(Section 4.1), canonical embeddings of graphs on the unit interval (Proposition 4.10),
and a class of graphons determined by distant-dependent coupling on manifolds
(Theorem 5.2). For the latter, we highlight that the manifold itself is the natural
choice to index the vertices rather than the traditional choice of indexing vertices
by the unit interval. Specific examples we analyze are the spherical graphon
(Section 5.5) and graphons on the torus (Section 5.3). We also introduce a notion
of graphop automorphisms and analyze the automorphism group of the spherical
graphop (Proposition 8.4).
Automorphisms of the network structure induce symmetries for dynamics on
the network. We generalize this observation from graphs to a general setting for
dynamical systems on graphons (Corollary 3.13) and graphops (Lemma 8.2). As
the dynamics on graph limits are typically infinite-dimensional, we consider the
dynamics on graph limits as dynamics on L1 (J), where J is an appropriate index
space. First, the general setup induces technical challenges: state of any given
vertex (or pair of vertices) that define synchrony for dynamics on graphs becomes
meaningless for typical dynamics on graph limits. Second, compared to their finitedimensional counterparts, dynamical systems on graph limits may have generalized
symmetries that can be noninvertible. This is due to the existence of non-invertible
measure preserving transformations, like the doubling map x 7→ 2x (mod 1) on the
unit interval. Note that graphons that are equivalent as graph limits yield distinct
dynamical systems. We show that while these may have wildly different symmetry
groups they can be related to one another (Section 3.1).
We subsequently apply our results to the study of graphon dynamical systems
with relevant topologies, with a focus on dynamical phenomena that are due to
symmetry. We show that dynamically invariant subspaces arise in two different
ways, as a set of fixed points of a symmetry or as the image of the Koopman
operator (Section 3.4). Cluster dynamics and multi-population structures are
well-studied in finite networks and generalize to graphons, see Theorem 4.4 and
Section 4.2. Moreover, we analyze systems with spherical symmetry (Figure 7),
and multi-dimensional twisted states for coupled oscillators on a torus (Section 5.3).
We also consider mean-field dynamics on graphons where the state of each node is
represented by a probability measure: Using symmetries we show that dynamical
systems on graphs [44], mean-field dynamics [30,48], multi-population mean fields [7],
and dynamics on graphons [36] are all dynamically invariant subspaces of the system
analyzed in [25].
Finally, we return to large- but finite-dimensional dynamical systems and their
relationship to dynamics on the graph limit. Note that convergent sequences of
asymmetric graphs can have symmetric limit: For example, Erdős-Renyi random

4

CHRISTIAN BICK

graphs are asymmetric with asymptotic probability 1 while they converge to the
constant graphon, which has a large symmetry group. Thus, it is natural to expect
that the dynamics on large (but finite) graphs will inherit dynamical features from
the symmetric limit. We make this observation rigorous in Section 6 which explains
our numerical findings in Figure 7.
Structure of the paper. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we
set the stage by considering a class of dynamical systems on graphs and their
symmetries. In the following Section 3, we generalize this class of dynamical
systems to graphons and show that graphon automorphisms induce symmetries
on the dynamics on the graphon. In Section 4 we exploit these results to analyze
symmetries and invariant subspaces of dynamical systems with relevant network
topologies, such as Kuramoto-type networks that consist of one (or more) coupled
populations. In Section 5 we consider networks that arise when the dynamical units
are placed on a manifold and coupling depends on the geodesic distance between
two units on the manifold; with the geometric structure, choosing index spaces
different from the unit interval becomes relevant. In Section 6, we compare the
dynamics of finite systems with those of the infinite-dimensional limit. In Section 7
we consider a first generalization to mean-field systems where the state of each
units is a probability measure. Symmetry arguments allow to see relationship to
other continuum limits. Finally, in Section 8 we consider symmetries of graphops
and dynamical systems on graphops as a second generalization.
Acknowledgments. The authors would like to thank C. Kuehn and Y. Zhao for
helpful discussions, the anonymous referees for helpful comments, and the hospitality
of the Institute of Advanced Study at the Technische Universität München (TUM–
IAS), where part of the work was carried out. CB acknowledges support from the
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) through the grant
EP/T013613/1 and a Hans Fischer Fellowship from TUM–IAS.
2. Graph dynamical systems and their symmetries
We first consider a class of network dynamical systems whose underlying network
structure is determined by a graph. We typically consider finite, undirected, simple
graphs and will simply refer to them as graphs—we will highlight if a graph comes
with extra structure (e.g., weights). A graph isomorphism is a bijective map
between the vertices preserving edges and non-edges. Intuitively, isomorphic graphs
are the same up to relabeling. This section will set the stage for a generalization
we will subsequently discuss: The main takeaway is that automorphisms of the
underlying graph yield a group of symmetries of the dynamical system.
2.1. Graph dynamical systems and transformations. To be concrete, let G
be a graph with vertex set {1, . . . , n} and let (Ajk )j,k denote its adjacency matrix.
Now suppose that the state of vertex j is uj ∈ R. For Lipschitz continuous
functions f, g : R2 → R we consider the graph dynamical system where the
state of node j evolves according to
!
n
1X
u̇j = f uj ,
Ajk g(uj , uk ) ,
j = 1, . . . , n.
(1)
n k=1

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

5

Inspired by the neural networks literature we call f the activation function
and g the coupling function. These function are understood to be fixed while
we will change the graph G.
Note that the vector field is Lipschitz continuous in u and therefore (1) defines a
dynamical system on Rn . We denote by D(G) the dynamical system and by ΦG
t (u)
the corresponding flow. In this paper a dynamical system is the datum of a phase
space together a the flow.
Graph dynamical systems (1) include as special cases the linear diffusion equation,
the replicator equation (with equal types), and the Kuramoto model of identical
phase oscillators on a graph
n

1X
u̇j =
Ajk sin(uk − uj + α),
n k=1

j = 1, . . . , n.

(2)

We will come back to (2) to illustrate the results by numerical simulations.
Isomorphic graphs support the same graph dynamical systems:
Theorem 2.1. Let φ : G → H an isomorphism of graphs. Then the map
φ∗ (v1 , . . . , vn ) = (vφ(1) , . . . , vφ(n) )
is an isometry of Rn mapping trajectories of the graph dynamical system D(H)
to trajectories of the graph dynamical system D(G). In particular, the following
diagram is commutative:
G

φ

H
.

D(G)

φ∗

D(H)

Proof. Clearly φ∗ is an isometry. It remains to prove that φ∗ maps solutions to
solutions. Let v a solution in D(H). Every vertex in H is the φ-image of a vertex
of G and


X

v̇φ(j) = f vφ(j) ,
g Hφ(j)k , vφ(j) , vk 
k∈v(H)


= f vφ(j) ,

X



g Hφ(j)φ(k) , vφ(j) , vφ(k) 

k∈v(G)


= f vφ(j) ,

X



g Gjk , vφ(j) , vφ(k)  .

k∈v(G)

We conclude that φ∗ v is a solution in D(G).

□

Corollary 2.2. If the graphs G and H are isomorphic, then the graph dynamical
systems D(G) and D(H) are topologically conjugated.
Remark 2.3. In the equivariant dynamical systems literature, the action is typically
defined as φ∗ (u)j = uφ−1 (j) . We prefer not to do so, as we will also consider
noninvertible maps φ in the following section.

6

CHRISTIAN BICK

Theorem 2.1 shows that graph isomorphisms map trajectories to trajectories.
Note that, in general, a graph homomorphism does not map trajectories to trajectories. For example, consider (2) on a connected graph G with more than one vertex,
let v be a vertex and H be the graph with one vertex v and no edges. Then v has
trivial dynamics in H and non-trivial dynamics in G. The embedding H → G does
not correspond to a map between dynamical systems. In [15] the notion of graph
dynamical system is different, but a similar analysis of these functorial aspects
appear.
2.2. Symmetries of graph dynamical systems and invariant subspaces.
An immediate consequence of Theorem 2.1 is that graph automorphisms yield
symmetries of the corresponding graph dynamical systems. This motivates the
following definition:
Definition 2.4. Let G be a graph with n vertices. Let φ : G → G an automorphism
of the graph. The map φ∗ : Rn → Rn is an isometry of Rn and a symmetry of the
dynamical system D(G). We call φ∗ a graph-induced symmetry.
Note that when we talk about ‘graph automorphisms’ we refer to the symmetries
of a graph as a combinatorial object. By contrast, the ‘graph-induced symmetries’
are symmetries of dynamical systems induced by the properties of the underlying
graph. The automorphism group of G and the group of graph-induced symmetries
of D(G) are, by definition, isomorphic. We make a clear distinction as they act on
different spaces, the set {1, . . . , n} and Rn , respectively.
We remark that the graph-induced symmetry group can be arbitrarily complicated.
Indeed, it is known that any finite group is the automorphism group of a graph [17].
As an example, the role of graph automorphisms for the dynamics of symmetrically coupled phase oscillators (2) has been analyzed in [2].
Graph dynamical system may have more symmetries than the graph-induced
symmetries. For example, for every dynamical system (X, Φ) and every t ∈ R
the map Φt is a symmetry. In the context of (1), extra symmetries can appear
for particular choices of f and g. If f = 0 dynamics is trivial and any bijection
of X is a symmetry. If g(u, v) = sin(u − v) the phase shift group of rotational
symmetries appear [2]. Usually one is interested in symmetries within a specific
group, for example linear transformations, homeomorphisms, or isometries. In this
paper we focus on the symmetries given by the combinatorial structure, which are
independent on the particular choice of f and g.
Symmetries induce dynamically invariant subspaces. In the case of graph-induced
symmetries, the subspaces are linear and given by equalities of coordinates—sets of
this form are also called cluster or polydiagonal subspaces. Let φ be a graph
automorphism. We have seen that φ∗ is a symmetry, and therefore the subspace
Fix(φ∗ ) = {u ∈ Rn | uφ(1) = u1 , . . . , uφ(n) = un }

(3)

is dynamically invariant.
If two vertices j, k have the same neighbors—such nodes are called twins—then
the transposition interchanging j and k is a symmetry. Consequently, the cluster
subspace {uj = uk } is dynamically invariant.

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

7

3. Graphon dynamical systems and their symmetries
We now introduce graphon dynamical systems as a generalization of graph
dynamical systems and extend the statements in Section 2.2 to this larger class.
Definition 3.1. Let J = (Ω, µ) be a probability space. A kernel is a symmetric
measurable function W : Ω×Ω → R. A graphon (J, W ) is a symmetric measurable
function W : Ω × Ω → [0, 1], that is, a kernel with range [0, 1].
To lighten the exposition, we will often use Ω and J interchangeably. On the
other hand, when integrating Ω with respect to two different probability measure,
we will make the underlying space Ω explicit.
The class of graph dynamical systems (1) considered in the previous section
naturally generalize to graphons. We consider a system of interacting units labelled
by J, where each unit x is associated to a state ux ∈ R.
Definition 3.2. Let (J, W ) be a graphon. Let f, g : R2 → R be two Lipschitz
continuous functions. We call graphon dynamical system the dynamical system
in the ambient space L1 (J) induced by the evolution equation
 Z

u̇x = f ux , W (x, y)g(ux , uy )dµ(y) ,
x ∈ J.
(4)
J

Since functions in L1 (J) are identified up to sets of measure zero, equation (4)
has to be understood in the following sense: For every t ∈ R the equation holds for
almost every x ∈ J, that is, up to a nullset (which may depend on t). Lemma 3.7
below shows that (4) actually defines a dynamical system in L1 (J).
Kuramoto dynamics on a graph, introduced in the previous section, generalizes
to a graphon as follows:
Z
u̇x = ω + W (x, y) sin(uy − ux + α) dµ(y).
(5)
J

where ω, α ∈ R are parameters. We come back to this example in numerical
simulations.
We refer to J = (Ω, µ) as index space. In contrast to some previous approaches
to dynamical systems on graphons [11, 12, 35], we consider graphons defined on a
general probability space J rather than the unit interval J = I only. There are three
reasons for this. First, some graphons have a natural underlying space J different
from the unit interval, e.g., the unit square with uniform measure or a sphere with
uniform measure. Although most of these J are standard probability spaces, and
thus can be transformed into I by an invertible measure-preserving transformation,
these transformations typically destroy regularity and symmetries, see the example
of prefix attachment graphs [31, Figure 11.3] or the geodesic graphon on a torus of
Figure 4 below. Second, we will see that interesting dynamically invariant subspaces
on J can be understood by analyzing the dynamics on a different graphon, on
another space J ′ , and studying the edge-preserving maps connecting J and J ′ .
Third, allowing the index space J to be a discrete probability space provides a
common framework for network dynamics on both finite graphs and graph limits.
Note also that one key difference between graph dynamical systems and graphon
dynamical system is that in the latter the vertex set is endowed with a (possibly
non-uniform) probability measure. In terms of the dynamics, this means that

8

CHRISTIAN BICK

some vertices may be more influential than others. Moreover, the kernel W , which
generalizes the adjacency matrix of a graph, can assume non-integer values between
0 and 1. One can think of a graphon (J, W ) and a (possibly infinite) vertex-weighted
and edge-weighted graph.
3.1. Graph limits, graphons, and equivalence. Graphons have been introduced
as limit of convergent dense graph sequences; see [31] for details. Roughly speaking,
a graph sequence is dense if the number of edges grows quadratically in the number
of vertices. Convergence can be defined in terms of homomorphism densities
(as we will not use this concept here, we refer to [31] for a definition): A dense
graph sequence (Gn )n is convergent if for every finite graph F the sequence of
homomorphism densities (t(F, Gn ))n is convergent. One of the main results of the
theory is that for every convergent dense graph sequence there is a graphon (J, W )
such that t(F, Gn ) converges to t(F, W ). It turns out that several (J, W ) are limit of
the same graph sequence. Therefore, a suitable notion of isomorphism is necessary.
Definition 3.3. Two graphons (J1 , W1 ) and (J2 , W2 ) are isomorphic up to
nullsets if there is a measure preserving transformation φ : J1 → J2 which is
invertible up to nullsets and satisfies W2 = W1φ almost everywhere, where we
define W φ (x, y) = W (φ(x), φ(y)).
This notion of isomorphism is the most relevant for our purposes since, as we
will see, it preserves dynamics.
Definition 3.4. Two graphons (J1 , W1 ) and (J2 , W2 ) are weakly isomorphic if
they have the same homomorphism densities or, equivalently, if they are limit of
the same graph sequence (again see [31]).
Two graphons that are limit of the same graph sequence can lie on completely
different probability space J. A consequence is that weakly isomorphic graphons
may lead to wildly different graphon dynamical systems as we discuss further below.
Example 3.5. For example, with probability 1 a sequence of Erdős-Renyi random
graphs on n nodes converges to both the constant graphon W = 1/2 on J = I
and the constant graphon W = 1/2 on the trivial probability space J = {1}
with µ({1}) = 1; these graphons are weakly isomorphic but not isomorphic up
to nullsets. As we will see in Section 4.1 the first one supports a rich infinitedimensional dynamical system, while the second one is one-dimensional.
One of the contribution of this paper is clarifying the role of weak isomorphism
in dynamics.
Defining automorphisms for graphons involves some nuances. For φ : J → J
write W φ (x, y) = W (φ(x), φ(y)) as in [31]. Requiring W φ (x, y) = W (x, y) for
almost every x, y is not sufficient, as noted in [32]: The reason is that, being two
measurable functions essentially the same up to nullsets, this definition would allow
every permutation of a finite set of points to be an automorphism. For example,
every graphon would have transitive automorphism group. Following [32] we define:
Definition 3.6. Let (J, W ) be a graphon. A graphon automorphism is an
invertible function φ : J → J satisfying
(A1) the function φ is measure preserving;

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

9

(A2) for every x ∈ J and for almost every y ∈ J we have W (φ(x), φ(y)) =
W (x, y).
We write Aut(J, W ) for the group of graphon automorphisms.
Weakly isomorphic graphons can have wildly different automorphism groups. To
address this fact, in [32] the authors define the automorphism group on a specific
class of graphons, called twin-free graphons. Every graphon is weakly isomorphic
to a twin-free graphon [31, Proposition 13.3] and the automorphism groups of
twin-free graphons are somehow better behaved. Since weak isomorphisms do not
preserve dynamics, we cannot restrict our analysis of automorphism groups to
twin-free graphons, although they will play a central role in Section 4.
3.2. Graphon dynamical systems. We now turn back to graphon dynamical
systems (4) and their properties. First note that the dynamics is well-defined:
Lemma 3.7. Equation (4) defines a dynamical system on L1 (J).
Proof. Let Kf , Kg ≥ 0 be Lipschitz constants for the functions f, g with respect
to the norm ∥(x, y)∥1 = |x| + |y|. Let F(u) denote the right hand side of (4). For
every u, v ∈ L1 (J) we have


Z
Z
∥F(u) − F(v)∥1 ≤ Kf |ux − vx | + Kg |ux − vx | + |uy − vy | dµ(y) dµ(x)
J

J

≤ (Kf + 2Kf Kg ) ∥u − v∥1 .
Therefore the operator F is Lipschitz continuous. By [8, Theorem 7.3] solutions
exist and are unique for t ∈ [0, ∞). Let Φt : L1 (J) × [0, ∞) → L1 (J) denote the
induced semiflow.
Now consider a variation of (4) in which f has been replaced by −f . The
same argument applies, giving another semiflow Ψt : L1 (J) × [0, ∞) → L1 (J).
Now fix t ≥ 0. By differentiating, it is easy to see that for every s ∈ [0, t] the
identity Φt−s (u) = Ψs (Φt (u)) holds. By taking s = t we have Ψt (Φt (u)) = u and
similarly one can prove that Φt (Ψt (u)) = u. Therefore the semiflow Φ can be
extended to a flow by defining Φt = Ψ−t for t < 0.
□
3.2.1. Examples of graphon dynamical systems. Recall that for a graphon (J, W ),
we denote by D(J, W ) the graphon dynamical system and by ΦW
t (u) the associated
flow. Note that the dynamical system depends on the probability measure µ on
the index space J as well as W . We give some examples.
Example 3.8 (Dynamics on a graph). Let J be the set {1, . . . , n} endowed with
uniform probability. Let {W (x, y) = Ax,y }x,y=1,...,n be the adjacency matrix of a
graph. Then (4) reduces to the dynamical system on a graph given in equation (1):
!
n
1X
u̇x = f ux ,
Ax,y g(ux , uy ) .
(6)
n y=1
Example 3.9 (Canonical Embedding). Let A be the adjacency matrix of a graph
with n vertices. The canonical embedding of the graph is a graphon on J = I.
Divide I into n intervals, so that I 2 is divided into n2 squares. Define W (x, y) = Ak,j
for x ∈ [(k − 1)/n, k/n], y ∈ [(j − 1)/n, j/n]. The function W associates 0, 1 to the
squares according to the adjacency matrix of the graph, see Figure 1. The resulting

10

CHRISTIAN BICK

graphon dynamical system is distinct from (6). However, we will see that if the
initial condition is constant on the intervals [(k − 1)/n, k/n], k ∈ {1, . . . , n} then
the resulting dynamics reduce to (6).

Figure 1. This graphon has a block structure which is a canonical
embedding on the unit interval of a finite graph with 5 vertices.
Example 3.10 (Dynamics on a weighted graph). We now generalize the previous
example to weighted graphs given by a edge-weight function W : {1, . . . , n}2 →
[0, 1] on weighted vertices. The vertex weights are given by discrete probability
distribution µ = (µx )x=1,...,n . The graphon dynamical system is
!
n
X
u̇x = f ux ,
µy Wx,y g(ux , uy ) .
y=1

As a concrete example, the finite graphon
3/10

1

1/2

9/10

1/5

is associated to the system


u̇1 = f (u1 , 1/2 · g(u1 , u2 ))
u̇2 = f (u2 , 3/10 · g(u2 , u1 ) + 9/50 · g(u2 , u3 ))

u̇ = f (u , 9/20 · g(u , u )).
3
3
3
2
One can define a canonical embedding of a weighted graph with vertex weights by
partitioning I into intervals of possibly different length.
Example 3.11 (Countable graph). In this example we will see that graphons,
although typically understood as limit objects for dense graphs, can represent
dynamical systems on sparse infinite graphs, as long as some finiteness property is
satisfied. Let J be a probability space on the set of natural numbers N. Let µ =
(µk )k∈N denote the probability measure. For any graph G on N the infinite coupled
system of differential equations
!
X
u̇j = f uj ,
µj Gj,k g(uj , uk )
k∈N
1

defines a P
dynamical system on L (J). An example is given in Figure 2. Notice that
the sum j µj is finite (by definition, it is equal to 1); if the vertex weights would
P
satisfy j∈N µj = ∞, the above system would not be representable as a graphon
system.

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

11

•1/2
•1/8

•1/8

•1/32
···

•1/32
···

···

•1/32
···

•1/32

···

···

···

···

Figure 2. Infinite binary tree.
3.3. Symmetries of graphon dynamical systems. Theorem 2.1 shows that an
isomorphism G → H between graphs corresponds to an isometry D(H) → D(G) of
(any) associated graphon dynamical system. The main result of this section is to
generalize the theorem to graphons. There is a key difference between graph and
graphon dynamical systems: While isomorphism between graphs are necessarily
invertible, for graphons they only need to be measure-preserving (but not necessarily
invertible).
For completeness, we recall some basic notions. Let J1 = (Ω1 , A1 , µ1 ) and J2 =
(Ω2 , A2 , µ2 ) be two probability spaces. A measurable map is a map φ : Ω1 → Ω2
such that the preimage of any measurable set is measurable: φ−1 (A) ∈ A1 for
every A ∈ A2 . Every measurable map φ : J1 → J2 induces on J2 a probability,
called the push forward of µ1 , defined by
(φ#µ1 )(A) = µ1 (φ−1 (A)),

A ∈ A2 .

The fundamental property of the push forward is the change of variable formula [49,
Lemma 1.2]: for every f ∈ L1 (J1 )
Z
Z
f (φ(x))dµ1 (x) =
f (x)d(φ#µ1 )(x).
Ω1

Ω2

A measurable map φ : J1 → J2 is called measure preserving if φ#µ1 = µ2 .
Equivalently, a measurable map φ is measure-preserving if and only if for every f ∈
L1 (J1 )
Z
Z
f (φ(x))dµ1 (x) =
Ω1

f (x)dµ2 (x).
Ω2

Notice that measure-preserving maps are not invertible in general. We are ready
for the main result of the section:
Theorem 3.12 (Correspondence Theorem). Let (J1 , W1 ) and (J2 , W2 ) be two
graphons. Suppose that
φ : J1 → J2
is measure preserving and W1 = W2φ holds almost everywhere. Then
φ∗ : L1 (J2 ) → L1 (J1 ),

(φ∗ v)x = vφ(x)

is an isometry mapping solutions to solutions. In particular, the following diagram
is commutative:
φ
(J1 , W1 )
(J2 , W2 )
.
D(J1 , W1 )

φ∗

D(J2 , W2 )

12

CHRISTIAN BICK

Proof. Let dL1 (J) denote the distance in L1 (J). Let u, v ∈ L1 (J2 ). Since φ#µ1 = µ2 ,
with the change of variable formula we obtain
Z
Z
∗
∗
∗
∗
dL1 (J1 ) (φ u, φ v) =
|φ u − φ v| dµ1 =
|u − v| dµ2 = dL1 (J2 ) (u, v),
J1

J2

∗

and thus φ is an isometry. It remains to prove that φ∗ maps solutions to solutions.
Let v be a solution of D(J2 , W2 ). Then for almost every x


Z
v̇φ(x) = f vφ(x) ,
g(W2 (φ(x), y), vφ(x) , vy )dµ2 (y)
J2


Z
= f vφ(x) ,
g(W2 (φ(x), φ(y)), vφ(x) , vφ(y) )dµ1 (y)
J1


Z
= f vφ(x) ,
g(W1 (x, y), vφ(x) , vφ(y) )dµ1 (y) .
J1
∗

Now define w = φ v, that is wx = vφ(x) for every x ∈ J2 . Then w ∈ L1 (J1 ) and by
the calculation above for almost every x ∈ J1 we have
 Z

ẇx = f ux ,
g(W1 (x, y), wx , wy )dµ1 (y) ,
J1
∗

and therefore w = φ v is a solution of D(J1 , W1 ).

□

Since φ∗ is an isometry, it is injective and the image is closed. The isometry φ∗
associated to a measure preserving transformation φ is known as Koopman operator.
Notice that a map φ preserving adjacency W1 = W2φ does not map solutions to
solutions in general. Preserving measure is a key hypothesis.
As a corollary we obtain that graphons isomorphic up to nullsets support the
same dynamical systems, generalizing the analogous result for graphs:
Corollary 3.13. If the graphons (J1 , W1 ) and (J2 , W2 ) are isomorphic up to
nullsets, then the dynamical systems D(J1 , W1 ) and D(J2 , W2 ) are isometric.
Proof. Let ψ the inverse of φ. Since ψ is invertible and measure preserving, its
inverse ψ is measure preserving. We conclude by noticing that ψ ∗ is the inverse
of φ∗ .
□
Corollary 3.13 shows that the index space J can be replaced by any probability
space isomorphic to J up to nullsets, without effectively changing the dynamics.
This replacement however can change the regularity of W as a function.
Recall that a graphon automorphism is a measure preserving map φ : J → J
such that for every x we have W φ (x, y) = W (x, y) for almost every y. In particular Corollary 3.13 applies to graphon automorphisms, motivating the following
definition:
Definition 3.14. Let (J, W ) be a graphon. Let φ : J → J an automorphism of
the graphon. The map φ∗ : L1 (J) → L1 (J) is an isometry and a symmetry of the
graphon dynamical system D(J, W ). We call φ∗ a graphon-induced symmetry.
By definition the graphon automorphisms of (J, W ) are in one-to-one correspondence with the graphon-induced symmetries of D(J, W ). We prefer to keep the
notions separate to highlight the different action space, J and L1 (J) respectively.

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

13

In later sections we will compute the automorphism group Aut(J, W ) of several
graphons.
Definition 3.15. Let (J1 , W1 ) and (J2 , W2 ) be two graphons. Suppose that φ :
J1 → J2 is measure preserving and W1 = W2φ holds almost everywhere. Then we
call φ∗ a generalized graphon-induced symmetry.
3.4. Dynamically invariant subspaces and generalized symmetries. We
now discuss two ways in which dynamically invariant subspaces can arise: as the
fixed point set of a graphon symmetry, or as the image of a generalized symmetry.
Let φ : J → J a graphon automorphism. By Corollary 3.13 the dual map φ∗ :
1
L (J) → L1 (J) is a symmetry of the graphon dynamical system. The set
Fix(φ∗ ) = {u ∈ L1 (J) | u(φ(x)) = u(x) a.e.}

(7)

is a closed, dynamically invariant subspace of L1 (J). This is a generalization of
dynamically invariant cluster subspaces on graphs (3).
The second way is distinct and relates to the Koopman operator. Let φ be a
map (J, W ) → (J ′ , W ′ ) preserving both measure and adjacency, as in Corollary 3.12.
Then the dual map φ∗ : L1 (J ′ ) → L1 (J) is an isometry embedding the dynamical
system D(J ′ , W ′ ) into the dynamical system D(J, W ). The set
φ∗ (L1 (J ′ )) = {v ◦ φ | v ∈ L1 (J ′ )}

(8)

is a closed, dynamically invariant subspace of L1 (J).
As a particular case, take J ′ = J and let φ : J → J be a non-invertible measure
preserving transformation which preserves adjacency. Although not invertible the
map φ∗ acts on L1 (J) as a symmetry of the dynamical system. A well known
example of non-invertible measure-preserving transformation on the unit interval
is the doubling map x 7→ 2x (mod 1). Non-invertible symmetries do not appear
on graphs. Indeed if J = {1, . . . , n} with uniform probability then the measure
preserving transformations are exactly the permutations.
In the following sections we will analyze subsystems of the form (7) and (8). In
some cases, these two approaches will lead to two alternative proofs of the same
statement.
4. Homogeneous coupling: twins yield clusters
In this section we consider graphons that describe homogeneous coupling in the
sense that there are ‘large’ sets of vertices with the same neighbors. Examples are
cluster dynamics, all to all coupling and finitely many coupled populations.
Definition 4.1. Let (J, W ) be a graphon. Two vertices x, x′ ∈ J are twins if
the functions W (x, ·) = W (x′ , ·) are equal almost everywhere. More generally,
let A ⊆ J be a measurable set. We say that the elements of A are twins if the
map y 7→ W (x, y) from J to R is independent of x ∈ A. A graphon is twin-free if
it contains no positive measure set of twin vertices.
Definition 4.2. Let (J, W ) be a graphon. Two vertices x, x′ ∈ J are twins
if W (x, y) = W (x′ , y) for almost every y ∈ J. More generally, the elements of a
measurable set A ⊆ J are twins if for every x, x′ ∈ A we have W (x, y) = W (x′ , y)
for almost every y ∈ J. A graphon is twin-free if it contains no positive measure
set of twin vertices.

14

CHRISTIAN BICK

Put differently, for a set of twins A the map y 7→ W (x, y), as a map J → R, is
independent on x ∈ A.

Figure 3. The connection strength between a vertex x ∈ [0, 1/5]
and a vertex y ∈ (1/5, 1] depends on y but not on x.
The twin relation is an equivalence relation. Moreover, the sets of the partition
are measurable. The index space J is union of measurable sets of twins. For
example, in the graphon of Figure 3 the interval [0, 1/5] is a set of twins; in this
case the partition is formed by [0, 1/5] and the singletons {x} for 1/5 < x ≤ 1.
Definition 4.3. Let A ⊆ J be a set of positive measure. The cluster subspace C(A) associated to A is the subset of functions u ∈ L1 (J) such that u is
constant on A up to nullset.
The following results, Theorem 4.4, shows that twin vertices starting synchronized
remain synchronized over time. In the case of finite graphs one can prove this
fact by comparing the evolution equations of a pair of twin vertices. The context
of graphons poses some technical challenges. First, we cannot look at only two
vertices at once: since functions in L1 are identified up to nullsets, for every
fixed x, y ∈ L1 ([0, 1]) we have
{u ∈ L1 ([0, 1]) | ux = uy } = L1 ([0, 1]).
It is necessary to work with a set of twins A of positive measure at once, rather
than individual pairs. Second, the evolution equation (4) holds for every t and
almost every x ∈ J, that is, for every t there is a nullset Kt such that the equation
holds for every x ∈ J \ Kt . However, we cannot fix a single
S set of measure zero
that works for all t: The set Kt depends on t, and the set t Kt can have positive
measure.
We give two proofs of Theorem 4.4, one in the general case and one in the
special case of the unit interval J = I. The proofs are based on the two different
applications (7) and (8) of the Correspondence Theorem 3.12, as announced in
Section 3.4.
Theorem 4.4. Let (J, W ) be a graphon and A ⊆ J a set of positive measure.
Suppose that all the vertices in A are twins. Then the cluster subspace C(A) is
(forward and backward) dynamically invariant.
Proof. This first proof is based on [31, Proposition 13.3]. Let J = (Ω, A, µ). Let Ae
be the sigma-algebra of those sets in A that do not separate any point of A.

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

15

e the conditional expectation of the function W with
f = E(W | Ae × A)
Let W
e Let Je = (Ω,
e A,
e µ̃) be the quotient probability space obtained by
respect to Ae × A.
identifying the elements of A and let φ : J → Je denote the projection.
f φ = W almost everywhere, see [31,
Then φ is measure preserving and satisfies W
Proposition 13.3] for details. By the Correspondence Theorem 3.12 the map φ∗
eW
f ) isometrically into D(J, W ). The image φ(L1 (J))
e is the subset
embeds D(J,
e These are
of L1 (J) consisting of functions of the form v ◦ φ for some v ∈ L1 (J).
exactly the functions constant on A up to nullset.
□
In the special case of the unit interval J = I we can give a somewhat simpler
proof, based on ergodic transformations.
Proof of Theorem 4.4 in the case J = I. The unit interval is an atomless standard
probability space. Every measurable subset of a standard probability space is
standard [22,45]. Therefore A endowed with the normalized measure is an atomless
standard probability space. All atomless standard probability spaces are isomorphic
up to nullset to the unit interval [24].
In particular A supports an ergodic transformation γ : A → A. Define γ
on I \ A as the identity map. A function in L1 (I) is γ-invariant if and only if its
restriction on A is γ-invariant and, since γ is ergodic on A, if and only if it constant
over A [49, Theorem 1.6].
□
Let us return to Figure 3. By Theorem 4.4 the set of functions constant
over [0, 1/5] up to nullsets is dynamically invariant, that is, it is a cluster. On the
other hand, notice that the set of functions constant over [1/5, 1] up to nullsets is
not dynamically invariant.
In Theorem 4.4 we reduce the space by identifying a set of twins. However,
inspired by [31], one can identify all the set of twins in (J, W ), obtaining the twineW
f ). The sigma-algebra and probability on the quotient are
free quotient (J,
constructed as in the first proof of Theorem 4.4. Dynamics on the twin-free quotient
is given by:
eW
f ) the associated twin-free
Proposition 4.5. Let (J, W ) be a graphon and (J,
quotient. Then

u ∈ L1 (J) | ux = uy for all twins x, y
(9)
is a closed, dynamically invariant subspace of J. The dynamics of D(J, W ) restricted
eW
f ).
to (9) is isometric to the dynamics on the twin-free quotient D(J,
e
Proof. Apply the Correspondence Theorem 3.12 to the projection J → J.

□

This motivates the following definition:
Definition 4.6. We call (9) the twin-sync subspace of D(J, W ).
The twin-sync subspace is the subset in which any two twins share the same
state. Proposition 4.5 shows that dynamics on the twin-sync subspace is the same
as the dynamics on the twin-free quotient.
Recall that graphons isomorphic up to nullsets lead to isometric graphon dynamical systems (Corollary 3.13) while, on the other hand, weakly isomorphic graphons
may have wildly different graphon dynamical systems (Example 3.5). The following
result explains the exact role of weak isomorphism in dynamics.

16

CHRISTIAN BICK

It requires the technical hypothesis that the probability space J is standard.
This however is not very restrictive, as most spaces considered in practice are
standard: finite and countable discrete probability spaces, the unit interval with
Lebesgue measure, any absolute continuous distribution on Rn , spheres and tori
with uniform probability, the set of all continuous functions [0, ∞) → R with the
Wiener measure.
Corollary 4.7. Suppose that J1 and J2 are standard probability spaces. If the
graphons (J1 , W1 ) and (J2 , W2 ) are weakly isomorphic, then the twin-sync subspaces
of D(J1 , W1 ) and D(J2 , W2 ) have isometric dynamics.
Proof. Since the graphons (J1 , W1 ) and (J2 , W2 ) are weakly isomorphic and every
f1 )
graphon is weakly isomorphic to its twin-free realization, then the graphons (Je1 , W
f2 ) are also weakly isomorphic. Twin-free weakly isomorphic graphons
and (Je2 , W
on standard probability spaces are isomorphic up to nullset [31, Theorem 13.9]. By
Corollary 3.13 graphons isomorphic up to nullset have isometric dynamics.
□
Remark 4.8. Roughly speaking, replacing a vertex by a set of twins and adjusting
the measure accordingly leads to an equivalent graphon in the sense of graph limit
theory (indeed, weakly isomorphic), which supports a different dynamic unless twins
start synchronized. Corollary 4.7 shows that this is essentially the only difference
between the notion of graphon equivalence in combinatorics and in dynamics.
4.1. Identical all-to-all coupling: The constant graphon. Consider a constant
graphon. In this case all vertices are twins. This has an immediate consequence
for dynamics: By Theorem 4.4, for every positive-measure subset A the cluster
subspace C(A) is dynamically invariant. In this section we analyze the symmetry
group of the graphon dynamical system and understand further consequences for
the dynamics.
For the sake of example, we consider J = I and W = 1. The automorphism group
of the graphon (I, 1) is the full group of measure preserving transformations Mp(I)
of the unit interval I, which has been well studied as a topological group [16, 23, 39].
In our context it is interesting to remark that every element of Mp(I) can be
approximated by a permutation of a finite partition of I into intervals [27] (although
the typical element of Mp(I) is not of this form [10]).
By any means, the group Mp(I) is large. This leads to a large number of
dynamically invariant subspaces (see Section 3.4). We describe some:
Proposition 4.9. Consider the graphon dynamical system D(I, 1). The following
subsets of L1 (I) are dynamically invariant:
(i) For every measurable subset A ⊆ I, the cluster subspace C(A);
(ii) For every measurable subsets A1 , . . . , An ⊆ I, the subspace
n
\
C(Ak )
k=1

in which every Ak is cluster;
(iii) The set of functions that are injective up to nullset;
(iv) For every positive integer q, the set of almost everywhere (1/q)-periodic functions;
(v) The set of functions satisfying the identity ux = u1−x almost everywhere.

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

17

Proof. Part (i) is a particular case of Theorem 4.4. Part (ii) and part (iii) follow
from part (i) and the fact that the set of dynamically invariant subsets is closed by
intersection, union and complement.
We prove (iv) in two ways. The transformation φ : x 7→ x + 1/q (mod 1) is
invertible and measure preserving, thus a symmetry of the dynamical system by
Corollary 3.13. The fixed point set Fix(φ∗ ) ⊆ L1 (I) is the set of (1/q)-periodic
functions. Alternatively, consider the non-invertible measure preserving transformation φ : x 7→ qx (mod 1) and consider the image of the dual map φ∗ .
We prove (v) in two ways. The transformation φ∗ : x 7→ 1 − x is invertible and
measure preserving, thus a symmetry of the dynamical system by Corollary 3.13.
The fixed point set Fix(φ∗ ) ⊆ L1 (I) is the set of functions satisfying ux = u1−x for
almost every x ∈ I. Alternatively, consider the non-invertible measure preserving
transformation φ mapping x 7→ 2x if x ≤ 1/2 and x 7→ 1 − 2x if x > 1/2 and
consider the image of the dual map φ∗ .
□
By taking A = I in Proposition 4.9 (i) we obtain the twin-synch subspace of
the system: Since all vertices are twins, dynamics reduces to the 1-dimensional
ordinary differential equation
u̇ = f (u, g(u, u)),

u ∈ R.

This describes the dynamics of the system as one giant cluster.
Proposition 4.9 (ii) leads to the finite-dimensional system
!
n
X
u̇j = f uj ,
g(uj , uk )µk ,
j = 1, . . . , n
y=1

where 1, . . . , n are the labels of the subsets, (µk )k their measure and uj the state
of the cluster. This describes multi-population cluster dynamics. Notice that
if µ1 = · · · = µn then we obtain the graph dynamical system on a complete
graph Kn , and that there are uncountably many ways of partitioning I into n sets
of measure 1/n, thus uncountably many copies of D(Kn ) in D(I, 1).
Proposition 4.9 (iv) leads to
!
Z 1/q
u̇x = f ux , q
g(ux , uy )dy ,
x ∈ [0, 1/q].
0

By substituting qdy = dµ(y), the normalized Lebesgue measure on [0, 1/q], we
see that this system is isometric to the full system D(I, 1). This shows that the
dynamical system D(I, 1) contains infinitely many copies of itself.
4.1.1. Canonical invariant region. Proposition 4.9 part (iii) generalizes an important
property known for systems on complete graphs [1, 2]. Since in a complete graph
any two vertices are twins, the states of two vertices can never cross each other over
time. In particular, if the initial condition k 7→ uk (0) is injective, then k 7→ uk (t) is
injective for every t. As a consequence, one can restrict dynamics to the canonical
invariant region defined by u1 < u2 < . . . < un , see [1, 2]. Proposition 4.9
part (iii) shows that, in the context of graphons, injectivity is preserved up to
nullset.

18

CHRISTIAN BICK

4.1.2. Large random graphs. For each positive integer n consider an Erdős-Renyi
random graph with n vertices. The probability that an Erdős-Renyi random graph
has a non-trivial automorphism goes to 0 as n goes to infinity [19, Corollary 2.3.3].
On the other hand, with probability 1 the graph sequence converges to the constant
graphon (I, 1/2), which has a large group of symmetries. Therefore, although the
system on n vertices is non-symmetric, one can expect dynamics to resemble the
symmetries of the limit for n large. In Section 6 we will prove that this is indeed
the case.
4.2. Coupled populations: Graphons with block structure. Consider a
partition of J into finitely many measurable subsets J1 , . . . , Jn . In this section we
suppose that the coupling between any two vertices x ∈ Jj and y ∈ Jk depends only
on j and k, that is, for every k = 1, . . . , n the vertices in each Jk are all twins. This
assumption models a family of n populations with homogeneous coupling within a
population but not necessarily among the populations. The case n = 1 is covered
in Section 4.1.
For the sake of example, we consider J = I. Fix n > 1 and define Ik =
[k − 1/n, k/n] for k = 1, . . . , n. Let G be a graph with n vertices and let Gj,k
denote the adjacency matrix. Dynamics on G is given by
!
1X
Gj,k g(uj , uk ) .
(10)
u̇k = f uk ,
n j
We now define a graphon WG on I by coupling the partition intervals according
to G:
X
WG =
Gj,k 1Ij ×Ik ,
(11)
j,k

see Figure 1. Dynamics on WG are given by
!
Z
X
u̇x = f uk ,
G(j, k)
g(ux , uy )dy ,
j

if x ∈ Ik .

(12)

Ij

The system
(10) can be obtained from (12) by restricting dynamics to the subT
space nk=1 C(Ik ) in which each Ik is cluster: One can show this directly from
the equations or by applying the Correspondence Theorem 3.12 to the function I → {1, . . . , n} mapping each point x ∈ Ik to the label k of the interval
it belongs to.
The graph-induced symmetries of (10) are the automorphism of G. These extend naturally to graphon-induced symmetries as permutations of the partition
intervals. However the graphon system (12) has additional symmetries. Indeed,
every interval Ik supports its own group of invertible measure preserving transformations Mp(Ik ). Notice that the groups Mp(Ik ) are all isomorphic to Mp(I) as
groups
Q (but the isomorphism does not preserve the measure). Since Aut(G) acts
on k Mp(Ik ) by exchanging the intervals, this formally gives the symmetry group
the structure of the wreath product
Y
Mp(Ik ) ⋊ Aut(G) ∼
= Mp(I) ≀ Aut(G).
k

We will see in Proposition 4.10 that, if the adjacency matrix of G is invertible,
then this is indeed the full automorphism group of WG . In general the group can

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

19

be larger. Graphs with invertible adjacency matrix are analyzed in [46]. If G
contains twins, say j and k, then the adjacency matrix is not invertible and the
automorphism is allowed to exchange mass between the intervals Ij and Ik .
Proposition 4.10. Let G be a graph with invertible adjacency matrix. Then the
automorphism group of WG is
Y
Mp(Ik ) ⋊ Aut(G).
Aut(WG ) ∼
=
k

Proof. It remains to be shown that every graphon automorphism is a composition
of an interval permutation (corresponding to an automorphism of G) and measure
preserving transformations of the intervals into themselves. To show this, observe
that in general a measure preserving transformation of I transfers mass between
the intervals (Ik )k . This transfer is represented by a Markov chain. More precisely,
we will obtain a double stochastic matrix P . Under the stronger assumption that
the transformation is an automorphism of WG , we will show that all the entries
of P are either 0 or 1. That is, the transformation preserves the partition.
Let (G(p, k))p,k denote the adjacency matrix associated to G. Fix x. By definition
we have W (φ(x), φ(y)) = W (x, y) for almost every y. Suppose that x ∈ Ip
and φ(x) ∈ Iq . By definition we obtain:
G(p, k)1Ik ∩φ−1 (Ij ) (y) = G(q, j)1Ik ∩φ−1 (Ij ) (y).
Define pkj = |Ik ∩ φ−1 (Ij )| /(1/n) and the matrix P = (pkj )k,j . Notice that P is
double stochastic. Moreover, we have
G(p, ·) = P G(q, ·)
and
P T G(p, ·) = G(q, ·).
It follows that P P T and P T P act identically on the rows of the adjacency matrix
of G. Since the adjacency matrix G is non-singular it follows that P P T = P T P is
equal to the identity matrix. We conclude that that P is a permutation matrix.
This shows that φ preserves the partition. Therefore it must be the composition
of a permutation of the set of intervals and measure preserving transformations
within each interval.
□
It is interesting to look at the dynamics on the invariant subspaces. Since each
group Mp(I
Q k ) contains an ergodic transformation, dynamics on the fixed point
set Fix( k Mp(Ik )) is the same as the graph dynamics D(G).
On the other hand, let us write j ∼ k if and only if j, k ∈ {1, . . . , n} belong to
the same Aut(G)-orbit. Then the fixed point set of Aut(G) is the subset of L1 (I)
of functions that repeat the same values on every intervals of the same orbit:
n
o
1
Fix(Aut(G)) = u ∈ L (I) u j +x = u k +x , ∀x ∈ [0, 1/n], ∀j ∼ k .
n

n

In particular, if Aut(G) is transitive then the fixed point set is the subset of
(1/n)-periodic functions and dynamics reduces to
!
Z 1/n
u̇x = f ux , deg(G)
g(ux , uy )dy ,
x ∈ [0, 1/n],
0

20

CHRISTIAN BICK

where deg(G) is the degree common to every vertex of G. Up to isomorphism this
is the same as dynamics on the constant graphon D(I, deg(G)/n). Intuitively, this
means that if Aut(G) is transitive and all the populations start with the same
initial conditions, then they evolve as just one population.
5. Networks with distance-dependent coupling
In this section we consider network dynamical systems that arise if the dynamical
units are placed on a manifold and coupling depends on the distance of the units on
the manifold. We refer to such a framework as geodesic coupling. The resulting
graphons are known are geodesic graphons or geometric graphons [14]. This
setup will lead to specific graphon dynamical systems where the graphon (J, W )
reflects the “geometry” of the manifold.
Graphon dynamical systems with geodesic coupling include a wide range of
relevant systems. The classic example is distance-dependent coupling on a circle:
Units are indexed by J = T (equipped with the standard metric and the uniform
measure) and two units ux and uy , where x, y ∈ T, interact if and only if their
distance d(x, y) is less or equal than some fixed constant δ. Note that if δ = π the
circle T is all-to-all connected and if δ < π the neighborhood of a point x is an
arc of length 2δ. Such distance-dependent interactions has been considered, for
example, in [11,35] as the continuum limit of corresponding families of graphs [33,51].
Indeed, geodesic coupling on the 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional torus has been
extensively considered in the analysis of chimera states [34,40,41]. Geodesic coupling
on the 2-dimensional sphere S 2 has been considered in graph limit theory [31], see
Example 13.2 and Example 13.16.
Graphon dynamical systems with geodesic coupling come with a natural choice for
the index space J—the manifold over which the coupling is defined. With this index
space, the kernel W will have a simple form determined by the coupling, reflecting
any symmetries the space J may have. Thus, while fixing J = I is sufficient in
graph limit theory [31], for graphon dynamical systems with geodesic coupling it can
obscure geometric (symmetry) properties—especially if the topological structure
has dimension larger than 1.
As an example, consider a geodesic coupling graphon on J = T2 . The probability
spaces I and T2 are isomorphic up to nullset. An explicit isomorphism is the
measure preserving transformation I → T2 that separates odd and even digits of
the binary expansion. Representing the graphon on J = I, however, hides the
symmetries, see Figure 4.
This section is organized as follows: First, we frame geodesic coupling in the
context of graphons; second, we apply the graphon formalism in order to understand
symmetries; third, we present numerical simulations for the 2-torus and the 2sphere. As a side product of our analysis we are able to explicitly compute the
automorphism group of several geodesic graphons.
5.1. Geodesic graphons. In order to frame geodesic coupling in the context of
graphons, we require the notion of Hausdorff measure. Let J be a compact, connected d-dimensional manifold endowed with metric d and d-dimensional Hausdorff
probability measure µ. If J is the unit circle T, the distance d(x, y) = ∡(x, y)
is equal to the smaller angle (in radians) between x and y while the measure µ
coincides with normalized Lebesgue measure inherited from the interval [0, 2π].

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

21

.
Figure 4. Representing a naturally 2-dimensional index space
on the 1-dimensional unit interval can create complicated, fractallike pictures, which hide the underlying graphon symmetries. The
graphon in this figure has automorphism group D4 ⋉ T2 .
More generally, if J is the d-dimensional torus Td = Rd /Zd , metric and measure
are inherited from Rd . If J is the unit 2-dimensional sphere S2 , the distance d is
the arc length and µ is the spherical measure. The Hausdorff measure is defined
from the metric. A consequence of this fact is that any isometry of the manifold is
measure preserving.
Fix δ > 0. The geodesic graphon Wδ : J × J → {0, 1} is defined as follows:
(
1, if d(x, y) ≤ δ
Wδ (x, y) =
0, otherwise.
Notice that Wδ is a graphon: From the definition of Hausdorff measure it follows
that Wδ is µ-measurable and clearly Wδ (x, y) = Wδ (y, x). The neighborhood of the
vertex x ∈ J, in the sense of graphon adjacency, is the ball of radius δ centered
at x.
5.2. The automorphism group of geodesic graphons. Let Wδ be a geodesic
graphon. An isometry is a bijection J → J preserving the metric d. By definition
it follows that both µ and Wδ are preserved by isometry. In particular any isometry
of J is a graphon automorphism of Wδ :
Proposition 5.1. Let Iso(J) be the isometry group of J. For every δ ≥ 0 the
inclusion Iso(J) ⊆ Aut(Wδ ) holds.
In Theorem 5.2 we will prove that, for a certain class of manifolds, isometries are
the only graphon automorphisms. This allows us to compute the automorphism
group Aut(Wδ ) for J = Td and J = Sd , covering the cases considered in literature.
For the proof of Theorem 5.2 to work, we need the following assumption: The
volume of the intersection of two geodesic balls depends only on the distance between
the centers and the radii. Spaces with this property have been characterized in [13].

22

CHRISTIAN BICK

It turns out that under mild hypothesis they are the same as harmonic spaces.
See [5] for equivalent definitions of harmonic space. Spheres and tori are harmonic
spaces.
Theorem 5.2. Suppose that J has the property that the volume of the intersection
of two geodesic balls depends only on the distance between the centers and the radii.
Then for every δ > 0 small enough the identity Iso(J) = Aut(Wδ ) holds.
Proof. We need to prove that every graphon automorphism φ is an isometry. Let Bxδ
denote the geodesic ball of center x and radius δ. For every x, y ∈ S 1 we have


Bxδ ∩ Byδ = φ−1 φ Bxδ ∩ φ Byδ .
Since φ preserves neighbors we have

δ
δ
Bxδ ∩ Byδ = φ−1 Bφ(x)
∩ Bφ(y)
.
Moreover, since φ preserves the measure we have


δ
δ
µ Bxδ ∩ Byδ = µ Bφ(x)
∩ Bφ(y)
.
By hypothesis the volume of the intersection of two geodesic balls depends only
on the distance between the centers and the radii. Let mδ (λ) denote the measure
of the intersection of two balls of radius δ and center distance λ. Notice that if δ is
larger than the diameter of the space J, then mδ (λ) is constant in λ: any two balls
of radius δ have intersection equal to the whole space J and mδ (λ) = 1 for every λ.
On the other hand, for δ small enough the function λ 7→ mδ (λ) is decreasing and
strictly decreasing if λ ∈ [0, 2δ]. We conclude that, for every δ small enough, we
have d(x, y) = d(φ(x), φ(y)) for any two points x, y of distance d(x, y) ≤ 2δ.
It remains to extend d(x, y) = d(φ(x), φ(y)) to points of arbitrary distance.
To do so, choose a geodesic path between x and y, then divide the path in
segments [xi , xi + 1] of length smaller than 2δ with x0 = x and xm = y. By
triangular inequality we have
X
X
d(φ(x), φ(y)) ≤
d(φ(xi ), φ(xi+1 )) =
d(xi , xi+1 ).
i

i

Since we have chosen a geodesic path between x and y, the right hand side is
equal to d(x, y). This proves d(φ(x), φ(y)) ≤ d(x, y) for every pair of points. Nonexpansive local isometry of a connected compact space to itself is an homeomorphism
is a surjective map, and an isometry [9, Theorem 4.2].
□
5.3. Graphon on the torus. Consider the 2-dimensional torus T2 = R2 /Z2 ,
endowed with metric and measure induced from R2 . Fix δ < 1 and consider the
geodesic graphon Wδ . By Theorem 5.2 the automorphism group of Wδ is the same
as the isometry group of the torus. With Dk denoting the dihedral group on k
elements, it is well known that

Iso T2 ∼
= D4 ⋉ T2 .
The component T2 is the group of translation of the torus, acting on itself. The
dihedral group D4 is generated by the transformations (x, y) 7→ (−y, x) and (x, y) 7→
(x, −y). Notice that D4 is the group of symmetries of the lattice Z2 ; taking the
quotient with respect to a different lattice leads to a homeomorphic (but not
isometric) torus, thus to a possibly different automorphism group.

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

23

Figure 5. We simulate the evolution of an initial condition
with symmetry (x, y) 7→ (−y, x) with respect to the coupling function g(ux , uy ) = sin(uy − ux + 1). The 2-dimensional torus is approximated by the graph C30 × C30 . In the picture, vertices are
arranged in a square for visual purposes: vertices on opposite sides
are understood to be connected. The pattern is preserved over time.
More generally, consider the d-dimensional torus Td = Rd /Zd . By Theorem 5.2,
for every δ small enough we have
Aut(Wδ ) ∼
= Iso(Zd ) ⋉ Td
where Iso(Zd ) is the symmetry group of the lattice Zd . Notice that Iso(Zd ) is a
finite group. As a consequence, we find some dynamically invariant subspaces. For
every ϵ1 , . . . , ϵd ∈ {−1, +1} the subspace given by the equation
u(x1 ,...,xd ) = u(ϵ1 x1 ,...,ϵd xd )
is dynamically invariant. Indeed, notice that for every ϵ1 , . . . , ϵd ∈ {−1, +1} the
map
(x1 , . . . , xd ) 7→ (ϵ1 x1 , . . . , ϵd xd )
is an isometry preserving the lattice Zd , thus an isometry of Td . Moreover, for
every direction (y1 , . . . , yd ) ∈ Rd the subspace given by the equation
u(x1 ,...,xd ) = u(x1 +sy1 ,...,xd +syd ) ,

s ∈ R,

is dynamically invariant. To show this, notice that {(sy1 , . . . , syd ) | s ∈ R} is a
subgroup of Td .
5.4. Multi-twisted states. We consider again geodesic coupling on the torus,
now in the particular case of Kuramoto coupling. Kuramoto model on a cycle
graph Cn supports a family of equilibria known as twisted states: For q ∈ Z the
q-twisted state is (2qkπ/n)k=1,...,n . We will see that continuous analogues of the
twisted states appear in geodesic graphons on tori of any dimension.
For fixed δ let Wδ be the geodesic graphon on the d-dimensional torus Td with
respect to the metric
dTd (x, y) = max(dT (x1 , y1 ), . . . , dT (xd , yd ))

24

CHRISTIAN BICK

Figure 6. Convergence to a (1, 3)-twisted state from a perturbed
configuration in C30 × C30 . Vertices are arranged in a square for
visual purposes.
and the product measure µ induced from Rd . Consider the Kuramoto model
on Td = (R/Z)d where the phase θx of x ∈ Td evolves according to
Z
θ̇x =
Wδ (x, y) sin(θy − θx )dµ(y).
(13)
Td

Proposition 5.3. For every vector of non-zero integers (q1 , . . . , qd ) the state
θx = 2π(q1 x1 + · · · + qd xd ),

x ∈ Td

(14)

is an equilibrium of (13). We call it (q1 , . . . , qd )-twisted state.
Proof. Substituting the (q1 , . . . , qd )-twisted state into the evolution equation yields
Z
Wδ (x, y) sin(2π(q1 (y1 − x1 ) + · · · + qd (yd − xd ))) dµ(y)
Td
!
d Z xk +δ
Y
=ℑ
e2πqk i(yk −xk ) dyk
k=1

=ℑ

xk −δ

d
Y
sin(2πqk δ)
k=1

!

πqk

=0
where ℑ denotes the imaginary part of a complex number.

□

5.5. Spherical graphon. For simplicity we restrict our analysis to the 2-dimensional
sphere S 2 . In it convenient to think of S 2 embedded in R3 as the set of solutions
of x2 + y 2 + z 2 = 1. By Theorem 5.2 we have
Aut(Wδ ) ∼
= O(3).
The graphon Wδ with δ = π/2 is known as spherical graphon, see [31, Example
13.2]. A “sparse” version of this graphon, known as spherical graphop, will be
considered in Section 8.

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

25

As a concrete example of symmetry-induced dynamically invariant subspace,
consider the set of functions invariant under rotation along a fixed axis. Reduced
dynamics can be represented as a graphon system parametrized by an interval, the
rotation axis. Other examples are given by the finite subgroups of O(3), that is,
the group of symmetries of the platonic solids.

Figure 7. We consider the coupling sin(θy − θx + 1) on a graph G
with 468 vertices, obtained by discretizing the sphere. Vertices are
placed on parallel circles in number proportional to the radius. We
start with an initial condition which depends on the latitude only.
In the limit this would correspond to a solution with rotational
symmetry along the north-south axis. Numerically we see that
symmetry is approximatively preserved for some time, but breaks
for t very large. This effect, caused by the fact that the graph G is
not truly rotationally symmetric bot only approximatively, will be
discussed in Section 6.
6. Ghosts of Symmetries
For a moment we return to graphs and graphons as combinatorial objects.
If we consider a convergent family of graphs, then the automorphisms of each
element may be starkly different from the automorphisms of the limit graphon;
cf. [32]. For example, with high probability a large Erdős-Renyi random graph
has no symmetries [19, Corollary 2.3.3] while the constant limit graphon has many
(Section 4.1).
Now turning to dynamics, a key reason to analyze dynamics on graphons is that
they approximate the dynamics of large but finite graphs, which are much less
analytically tractable. One can make this rigorous by proving explicit statements
of how close the dynamics on finite graphs are to the dynamics on the limit object
(at least for some finite time); see for example [11, 12, 25, 36, 38].
Therefore, there are families of converging graphs supporting very few synchrony
patterns (due to the lack of symmetries) but the dynamics on the limits have a lot
(due to the many symmetries). But since the dynamics of finite and limit system

26

CHRISTIAN BICK

are close, we know that even the finite, non-symmetric dynamical system can show
finite-time synchronous behavior due to the dynamics of the limit object. So for
finite graph dynamical systems we can see ghosts of symmetries of the limit
graphon dynamical system: We observed this effect for Erdős-Renyi random graphs
and for spherical graphs in Figure 7 and is related to the metastable dynamics
observed in [37, Figure 5]. The important consequence is we should not be surprised
if graph dynamical systems on large but highly non-symmetric graphs show finitetime synchronized dynamics—understanding the symmetries of the limit object is
the key to this insight. The goal of this section is formalizing this observation.
How well graph dynamics approximate the graphon limit dynamics depends on
the choice of f and g. For concreteness we focus on Kuramoto dynamics
Z
u̇x = W (x, y) sin(uy − ux ) dµ(y)
(15)
J

in line with previous investigations. In [36] the author assumes convergence
of (J, W (n) ) to (J, W ) in L1 (J 2 ). Although this is convenient for the convergence of
dynamics, it excludes several convergent graph sequences that are of interest here,
like Erdős-Renyi random graphs. In order to include these cases, we will prove a
stronger statement.
Indeed, we will assume convergence in the weaker norm ∥ ∥∞→1 , which is
equivalent to convergence in terms of homomorphism densities up to vertex relabeling [31, Theorem 11.59]. Indeed we show that the norm ∥ ∥∞→1 , which is
strictly weaker than the L1 -norm, is actually sufficient to guarantee convergence of
dynamics in the case of sine coupling. In the following theorem we prove ∥ ∥∞→1 continuity with respect to the graphon and ∥ ∥1 -continuity with respect to the
initial condition:
Theorem 6.1. Consider two graphons W, U on the same index space J and
let ΦW , ΦU denote the flows induced by Kuramoto coupling (15) respectively. Let u(0),
U
v(0) ∈ L1 (J). Define u(t) = ΦW
t (u) and v(t) = Φt (v). Then for every t ∈ R
∥u(t) − v(t)∥1 ≤ (∥u(0) − v(0)∥1 + 2t ∥W − U ∥∞→1 ) e2t .
Proof. For every s ∈ R and every x ∈ J we have
u̇x (s) − v̇x (s) =
Z
(W (x, y) − U (x, y)) sin(uy (s) − ux (s))dy
Z
− U (x, y) (sin(vy (s) − vx (s)) − sin(uy (s) − ux (s))) dy.
From the addition formula for sine it follows that (16b) is bounded by
∥W − U ∥∞→1 ∥sin(u(s))∥∞ |cos(ux (s))|
+ ∥W − U ∥∞→1 ∥cos(u(s))∥∞ |sin(ux (s))|
≤ 2 ∥W − U ∥∞→1 .
On the other hand (16c) is bounded by
|vy (s) − uy (s)| + |vx (s) − ux (s)| .

(16a)
(16b)
(16c)

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

27

Therefore, integrating (16a), (16b), and (16c) on J gives
Z
|u̇x (s) − v̇x (s)| dx ≤ 2 ∥W − U ∥∞→1 + 2 ∥u − v∥1 .
Integrating with respect to time gives
Z t
2 ∥u(s) − v(s)∥1 ds.

∥u(t) − v(t)∥1 ≤ ∥u(0) − v(0)∥1 + 2t ∥W − U ∥∞→1 +
0

Grönwall’s Lemma completes the proof.

□

Let (J, W (n) )n be a sequence of graphons which converges to (J, W ) in the infinity
to one norm. Theorem 6.1 implies that, for every fixed t, the flow
ΦtW

(n)

: L1 (J) → L1 (J)

converges uniformly, as a map, to
1
1
ΦW
t : L (J) → L (J).

Moreover, convergence is uniform in time if t is restricted to any compact interval [−T, +T ]. In particular:
Corollary 6.2. Let (J, W (n) )n be a sequence of graphons which converges to (J, W )
in the infinity to one norm. Let u(n) ∈ L1 (J) be a sequence of initial conditions
converging to u ∈ L1 (J) in the L1 -norm. Then for every t ∈ R
lim u(n) (t) − u(t) 1 = 0

n→∞

holds. Convergence is uniform in t on any compact interval [−T, +T ].
Theorem 6.1 explains the almost symmetric dynamics of large systems whose
limit is symmetric:
Corollary 6.3 (The Ghost of Symmetries). Let (J, W ) be a graphon with automorphism φ and let u(t) ∈ D(J, W ) be a trajectory satisfying φ∗ (u(0)) = u(0).
Let (J, W (n) )n be a sequence of graphons and u(n) (t) ∈ D(J, W (n) ) a sequence of
trajectories such that
lim W (n) − W ∞→1 = 0,

n→∞

lim u(n) (0) − u(0) 1 = 0.

n→∞

Then for every t ∈ R
lim φ∗ (u(n) (t)) − u(n) (t) 1 = 0.

n→∞

Moreover, convergence is uniform in t on any compact interval [−T, +T ].
Proof. By triangular inequality
φ∗ (u(n) (t)) − u(n) (t) 1 ≤ φ∗ (u(n) (t)) − φ∗ (u(t)) 1 + φ∗ (u(t)) − u(n) (t) 1 .
Consider the two terms in the right hand side. Since φ∗ is an isometry of L1 then
the first one is equal to u(n) (t) − u(t) 1 . Since φ∗ is a symmetry of D(J, W ) then
the second term is equal to u(n) (t) − u(t) 1 . Therefore
φ∗ (u(n) (t)) − u(n) (t) 1 ≤ 2 u(n) (t) − u(t) 1 .
Theorem 6.1 implies
φ∗ (u(n) (t)) − u(n) (t) 1 ≤ 2


u(n) (0) − u(0) 1 + 2t W (n) − W ∞→1 e2t . (17)

28

CHRISTIAN BICK

Taking the limit concludes the proof.

□

Equation (17) shows how much the trajectory of an approximatively symmetric
system can deviate from being symmetric for any fixed time. In particular it can
be used to estimate the minimal time needed for a given large deviation from
symmetry.
Note that an additional step is needed to apply Corollary 6.3 to simulations. Indeed, in simulations we approximated the limit graphon dynamical system D(J, W ),
defined on some continuum index space J, with a graph dynamical system D(G(n) )
on a different index space, namely the discrete set {1, . . . , n}. In order to apply Corollary 6.3 one has to first embed every finite system in the same index
space J where the limit is defined. There are many ways of doing so; if J = I
the canonical embedding is one such way. If the graph sequence G(n) converges to
the graphon (J, W ) in terms of homomorphism densities then it is always possible
to represent G(n) as a graphon W (n) on J in a way that makes W (n) − W ∞→1
converge to zero.
Notice that the proof of Corollary 6.3 does not require φ to be invertible. In
other words, one may also observe ghosts of generalized symmetries.
7. Symmetries of Mean-Field Graphon Dynamical Systems
In this section we consider generalizations of graphon dynamical systems in which
states, instead of being real-valued, are measure-valued. So far, the state of x ∈ J
was given by some number ux ∈ R. By contrast, mean-field transport equations
describe not the evolution of points but rather general probability measures. Meanfield equations on convergent families of graphs have been introduced in [25];
we will refer to these systems as mean-field graphon dynamical systems
and make this precise below. We now generalize graphon-induced symmetries to
such mean-field graphon systems. The main result of this section is to exploit
symmetry arguments to show that mean-field graphon system contains a range of
simpler systems that have been analyzed independent of one another literature. For
concreteness, we follow [25] and restrict our analysis to the case of phase oscillators
and assume J = I.
We first take a step back and recall the notion of mean-field dynamics for a globally
coupled Kuramoto oscillator network (2)—we refer to this as the corresponding
mean-field dynamical system. Let T = R/Z be the 1-dimensional torus and
let M be the set of Borel probabilities on T. Rather than tracking the state
of each oscillators, the mean-field dynamical system describes the evolution of a
measure µ ∈ M over time, given by
µ(t) = Φ(t)#µ0
where Φ is the flow on T induced by the differential equation
Z
u̇(t) = sin(v − u(t)) dµ(t)(v)

(18)

(19)

T

and # denotes the push-forward of measures. Together, equations (18) and (19)
represent the mean-field dynamics of (2) on complete graphs as n → ∞.
While in the mean-field dynamical system we only track the state distribution
of all oscillators as a whole, in the graphon dynamical systems we consider the

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

29

dynamics on the corresponding graph limit (the constant graphon on J = I).
Indeed, the mean-field system can be obtained from the graphon dynamical system
by forgetting the labels: To make this statement precise, let λ denote the Lebesgue
measure on I, let W = 1 and consider a solution t 7→ u(t) of the graphon system
Z
u̇x (t) = W (x, y) sin(uy (t) − ux (t)) dλ(y).
I

Then the measure µ(t) = u(t)#λ is a solution of the mean-field system (18):
Z
Z
sin(uy (t) − ux (t)) dλ(y) = sin(v − ux (t)) dµ(t)(v).
I

T

The mean-field graphon dynamical system now combines the two aspects: It
describes the evolution of a family of measures indexed by I, a measure-valued
measurable function I → M. We can interpret the latter in two ways: First, as a
graphon system with non-deterministic states; second, as infinitely many mean-field
systems coupled through a graphon.
Let MI denote the set of maps I → M such that the preimages of open sets
are measurable. This space is endowed with a metric [25]. Fix a continuous
map µ : R → MI , an index x ∈ I and a graphon W . For every t0 ∈ R and u0 ∈ T
there exist a unique solution ux : R → T to the following initial value problem [25,
Lemma 2.2]:
(
R
R
u̇x (t) = I W (x, y) T sin(v − ux (t)) dµ(y, t)(v) dy
(20)
ux (t0 ) = u0 .
Let Φ(µ, x, t, •) denote the flow induced by the initial value problem. Notice that
we have a flow for each choice of x.
Definition 7.1. The mean-field graphon dynamical system is given by
µ(x, t) = Φ(µ, x, t, •)#µ(x, 0)

(21a)

µ(x, 0) = µ0 (x)

(21b)

where Φ(µ, x, t, •) : T → T is the flow induced by (20) and µ0 ∈ MI . These
equations are required to hold for every t ∈ R and almost every x ∈ I.
Existence and uniqueness of the mean-field graphon system are proved in [25]
for t ∈ [0, T ] and can be extended to t ∈ R as in Lemma 3.7.
Graphon-induced symmetries act on the index space I and not on the state
space. As a consequence, the graphon-induced invariant subspaces in the graphon
system I → R and in the mean-field graphon system I → M are essentially the
same, in the sense that they are given by the same equations. In the following
theorem we prove that indeed graphon-induced symmetries extend to the mean-field
graphon system.
Theorem 7.2. Let γ : I → I be a measure-preserving transformation satisfying W γ = W . Then γ acts on MI by sending a measured-valued function µ : x 7→ µ(x) to the measure-valued function µ ◦ γ : x 7→ µ(γ(x)). The
action is a symmetry of the mean-field graphon system.
Proof. Let γ be as in the statement. The elements of MI are the maps I → M
such that the preimages of open sets are measurable [25]. Fix µ ∈ MI and a

30

CHRISTIAN BICK

measurable set A ⊆ M. Then (µ ◦ γ)−1 A is equal to the set γ −1 (µ−1 A). This
set is measurable since µ−1 A is a measurable set and γ : I → I is a measurable
function. This proves that µ ◦ γ ∈ MI .
We now prove that γ is a symmetry of the dynamical system. Let µ(x, t) be
a solution of (21) with initial value µ0 (x). We need to show that µ(γ(x), t) is a
solution with initial value µ0 (γ(x)). The initial value condition is trivial. It remains
to prove that (21a) is satisfied if µ(x, t), µ and µ(x, 0) are replaced by µ(γ(x), t),
µ ◦ γ and µ(γ(x), 0) respectively. By definition
µ(x, t) = Φ(µ, x, t, •)#µ(x, 0)
holds for almost every x. Since γ is measure-preserving then
µ(γ(x), t) = Φ(µ, γ(x), t, •)#µ(γ(x), 0)
holds for almost every x as well. Since our goal is to prove that
µ(γ(x), t) = Φ(µ ◦ γ, x, t, •)#µ(γ(x), 0),
it remains to be shown that Φ(µ, γ(x), t, •) is equal to Φ(µ ◦ γ, x, t, •). We compare
the equations defining these flows. Note that Φ(µ ◦ γ, x, t, •) is given by
Z
Z
u̇(t) = W (x, y) D(v − u(t)) dµ(γ(y), t)(v) dy
I

T

while Φ(µ, γ(x), t, •) is given by
Z
Z
u̇(t) = W (γ(x), y) D(v − u(t)) dµ(y, t)(v) dy.
I

T

The latter can be obtained from the former by replacing W (x, y) with W (γ(x), γ(y))
and then γ(y) with y. Since W γ = W and γ is measure-preserving, then none of
these operations change the right hand side.
□
We now return to constant coupling W = 1. Inspired by Section 4.1 we look at
the cluster space
{µ ∈ MI | x 7→ µ(x) is constant} ∼
= M.
This set is dynamically invariant and the mean-field graphon dynamics restricted
to the set is the same as the mean-field dynamics (see F in Figure 8). Indeed,
since W = 1 and y 7→ µ(y) is constant we have
Z
Z
Z
W (x, y) sin(v − u) dµ(y, t)(v) dy = sin(v − u) dµ(y, t)(v).
I

T

T

Mean-field graphon dynamics represents the evolution of infinitely many coupled
mean-field populations. When all the populations start with the same initial
condition—that is, they are synchronized as probability measures—it reduces to
the evolution of just one population (see A in Figure 8).
P
Now consider a graphon with a block structure WG =
j,k Gj,k 1Ij ×Ik as in
Section 4.2 and the cluster space
n
\
{µ ∈ MI | µ : Ik → M is constant} ∼
= Mn
k=1

S
associated to the partition I = nk=1 Ik . Each block evolves as a single mean-field
system. Cluster dynamics represents the evolution of n measures coupled by the

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

31

Figure 8. We sketch the inclusions of different network dynamical
systems. We use cylinders I × T to represent the state space of the
dynamical units in different limits. On the top-left, the mean-field
limit, the interval I can be identified to a point (one population)
whose state is described by one probability measure on T (whose
support is represented in gray). The bottom-left generalizes this
mean-field to more than one population. If the probability measures
of the multi-population mean-field are Dirac, we recover the finite
system, bottom-right. The top-right represents the graphon system.
The most general mean-field graphon system, in the center, contains
all the others as particular cases.
graph G. This system is known as multi-population mean-field limit and has been
analyzed in [7].
We have seen how mean-field and multi-population mean field are dynamically
invariant subspaces of the mean-field graphon system if the underlying graphon
has certain symmetries. Now we see how the graphon system can also be seen
as a dynamically invariant subset of the mean-field graphon system (see C in
Figure 8). Intuitively, the graphon system is deterministic and the states can be
interpreted as Dirac measures. If µ(x) = δu(x) is a Dirac measure for every x then
the push-forward (21a) is a Dirac measure for every x and t and the flow Φ(δu , x, t, ·)
of x reduces to the graphon evolution equation:
Z
Z
Z
W (x, y) sin(v − ux ) dµ(y, t)(v) dy = W (x, y) sin(uy − ux ) dy.
I

T

I

Figure 8 summarizes the inclusions of invariant subspaces of mean-field graphon
dynamical systems.
8. Symmetries of Graphops and Graphop Dynamical Systems
Finally, we consider the symmetries and their implications for dynamical systems
on graphops; see for example [29]. While graphons are natural limit objects for
converging sequences of dense graphs, there are other notions of graph convergence
such as Benjamini–Schramm convergence for sparse graph sequences [4]. Graphops

32

CHRISTIAN BICK

interpret graph sequences and their limits as operators and provide a unifying
framework for different notions of convergence [3]. We now consider a generalization
of the graph dynamical system (1) to graphops—we refer to them as graphop
dynamical systems—and analyze their symmetry properties.
8.1. Graphop dynamical systems. Fix a probability space J = (Ω, A, µ). Recall
that a graphon dynamical system (4) evolves according to
 Z

u̇x = f ux , W (x, y)g(ux , uy )dµ(y) .
J

We can interpret νx = W (x, ·)dµ as a measure that has a density W (x, ·) with
respect to µ. What now determines the dynamics is the joint effect of graphon
and measure rather than their individual effect. Intuitively, graphops generalize
graphons by removing the hypothesis of having a density.
A graphop is a self-adjoint, positive-preserving bounded operator L∞ (J) →
L1 (J). Every graphop can be represented by a symmetric measure ν on the product
space (Ω × Ω, A × A) [3, Theorem 6.3]. By using the disintegration theorem
one obtains a family of measures {νx }x∈Ω , called fiber measures, that uniquely
represent the graphon [3, Remark 6.4]. We call graphop dynamical system the
dynamical system on L1 (J) induced by
 Z

u̇x = f ux , g(ux , uy )dνx (y) .
Ω

We propose the following definition of graphop automorphism:
Definition 8.1. Let (νx )x∈Ω be a graphop on J = (Ω, A, µ). An automorphism
of the graphop is a measurable bijection φ : (Ω, A) → (Ω, A) such that φ∗ : L1 (J) →
L1 (J) and satisfying φ#νx = νφ(x) for every x.
The identity φ#νx = νφ(x) is shorthand of two things: First, the map φ :
(Ω, νx ) → (Ω, νφ(x) ) is measurable and, second, it is measure preserving. Notice
that, as oppose to graphon automorphisms, we do not require φ : (Ω, µ) → (Ω, µ) to
be measure-preserving. A consequence of this fact is that graphop symmetries are
symmetries of graphop dynamical systems, but in general they are not isometries.
Lemma 8.2. Let (νx )x∈Ω be a graphop on J = (Ω, A, µ). Let φ be a graphop
automorphism. Then
φ∗ : L1 (J) → L1 (J),

u 7→ u ◦ φ

is a symmetry of the graphop dynamical system. We call φ∗ a graphop-induced
symmetry.
Proof. Let u ∈ L1 (J). By definition of graphop automorphism and the change of
variable formula we have


Z
f uφ(x) , g(uφ(x) , uy )dνφ(x) (y)
Ω


Z
= f uφ(x) , g(uφ(x) , uy )d(φ#νx )(y)
Ω


Z
= f uφ(x) , g(uφ(x) , uφ(y) )dνx (y) .
Ω

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

33

This shows that φ∗ maps solutions to solutions.

□

Every graphon is a graphop. In the following lemma we show that graphoninduced symmetries are graphop-induced symmetries, although we will see that
the converse is false in general.
Lemma 8.3. Let W be a graphon on J and {νx = W (x, ·)dµ}x∈J the associated
graphop. Every graphon automorphism is a graphop automorphism. A graphop
automorphism φ is a graphon automorphism if and only if it preserves µ. In particular, the graphop-induced symmetries are exactly the graphon-induced symmetries
that are isometries of L1 (J).
Proof. Let φ : J → J be an invertible measurable map. Fix x ∈ J. Notice that
W (φ(x), φ(y)) = W (x, y)
holds for almost every y ∈ J if and only if
W (φ(x), y) = W (x, φ−1 (y))
holds for almost every y ∈ J. Moreover, notice that φ is an automorphism of (νx )x
if and only if for every x and every measurable function p we have
Z
Z
p(φ(y))W (x, y)dµ(y) = p(y)W (φ(x), y)dµ(y)
J

J

which is the same as
Z
Z
−1
p(y)W (x, φ (y))d(φ#µ)(y) = p(y)W (φ(x), y)dµ(y).
J

(22)

J

Therefore, if φ is a graphon automorphism then W (x, φ−1 (y)) = W (φ(x), y) for
every x and almost every y. This implies φ#µ = µ and, by definition, that φ is a
graphop automorphism.
On the other hand, if a graphop automorphism φ preserves µ, then for every x
and every measurable function p
Z
Z
−1
p(y)W (x, φ (y))dµ(y) = p(y)W (φ(x), y)dµ(y).
J

J
φ

This implies W (x, y) = W (x, y) for every x and almost every y. Therefore every
measure-preserving graphop automorphism is a graphon automorphism.
The last statement follows form the fact that a measurable map φ : J → J is
measure-preserving if and only if φ∗ : L1 (J) → L1 (J) is an isometry.
□
In the context of graphon dynamical systems we have introduced the notion of
generalized graphon-induced symmetry (Definition 3.15). These are not graphon
automorphisms, as they are map between two graphons and are not necessarily
invertible. One might do the same for graphop dynamical systems.
8.2. Spherical graphop and other examples. We illustrate the results with two
concrete examples. The first example highlights that graphop-induced symmetries
can be richer than graphon symmetries: While graphon symmetries only take the
structure of the kernel into account, graphop-induced symmetries combine kernel
and index space that both determine the network dynamics. In the second example,
we compute the symmetry group of the spherical graphop, a generalization of the
spherical graphon in Section 5.5.

34

CHRISTIAN BICK

Finite graphop. Consider a graphon W with four vertices a, b, c, d with probability
measure µ = (2/9, 1/9, 4/9, 2/9) and two edges ab and cd with weights W (a, b) = 1
and W (c, d) = 1/2:

µ({a}) = 2/9,



a
c
µ({b}) = 1/9,
1/2
1

µ({c}) = 4/9,



b
d
µ({d}) = 2/9.
The only non-identical measure preserving transformation is the permutation
interchanging a with d, which does not preserve adjacency. Therefore, the only
graphon automorphism is the identity map. Direct computation shows that the
fiber measures of the associated graphop are








1
2
1
2
νa = 0, , 0, 0 , νb =
, 0, 0, 0 , νc = 0, 0, 0,
, νd = 0, 0, , 0 .
9
9
9
9
Therefore, the permutation interchanging a with c and b with d is a graphop
automorphism. Indeed, it is a symmetry of the associated dynamical system


u̇a = f ua , 91 g(ua , ub )



u̇ = f u , 2 g(u , u )
b
a
b
b 9

1

u̇c = f uc , 9 g(uc , ud )




u̇d = f ud , 92 g(ud , uc ) .
Spherical graphop. The spherical graphop is a typical example of graph limit of
intermediate density, see [3, Figure 4] and [18, Example 5.4]. The spherical graphop
is a sparse version of the spherical graphon we considered in Section 5.5. As
for the spherical graphon, we compute the automorphism group and discuss the
consequence for dynamics.
Let J be the unit sphere S 2 = {x ∈ R3 | xT x = 1} endowed with uniform
probability measure. For every x ∈ S 2 let νx be the uniform measure on the great
circle {y ∈ S 2 | y T x = 0} orthogonal to x. The spherical graphop is given by
the collection of fiber measures (νx )x∈S 2 .
As one may expect, the spherical graphon and spherical graphop have the same
automorphism group. But the proofs are quite different: While the graphon case
involved geometric measure theory, for the graphop case we will use projective
geometry and arguments in [28]. If automorphisms are assumed to be smooth
(which is a consequence of the following result), an alternative proof using differential
geometry can be given.
Proposition 8.4. The automorphism group of the spherical graphop is the isometry
group of the sphere O(3).
Proof. Every orthogonal transformation is measurable and preserves adjacency,
thus it is a graphop automorphism.
Conversely, for an automorphism φ of the spherical graphop we have to show
that φ ∈ O(3). The map φ is a bijective map S 2 → S 2 which maps orthogonal
vectors to orthogonal vectors. In particular, φ preserves antipodal pairs. The
quotient of S 2 with respect to the antipodal pair relation is canonically identified

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

35

with the projective plane, the quotient of R3 with respect to the linear dependence
relation. Therefore φ induces a bijection of the projective plane with itself.
Since φ preserves orthogonality, then φ maps great circles to great circles. The
great circles in S 2 corresponds to the projective lines in the projective plane.
Therefore φ induces a bijection of the projective plane preserving collinearity. The
Fundamental Theorem of Projective Geometry states that any such map is given
by an invertible linear transformation T of R3 . The transformation T is uniquely
determined up to scalar multiplication.
Any linear transformation preserving orthogonality is a scalar multiple of an
orthogonal transformation. Therefore φ = λT for some λ ̸= 0 and some orthogonal
transformation T . Since φ maps S 2 to itself then |λ| = 1. We conclude that φ ∈
O(3).
□
Dynamics on the spherical graphop, considered in [18, Example 5.4], has a group
of symmetries O(3). For example, the space of functions invariant under rotation
along a fixed axis is dynamically invariant. Reduced dynamics can be represented
as a graphop system parametrized the invariant diameter.
References
[1] P. Ashwin, C. Bick, and O. Burylko, Identical phase oscillator networks: Bifurcations,
symmetry and reversibility for generalized coupling, Frontiers in Applied Mathematics and
Statistics, 2 (2016), p. 7.
[2] P. Ashwin and J. W. Swift, The dynamics of n weakly coupled identical oscillators,
Journal of Nonlinear Science, 2 (1992), pp. 69–108.
[3] Á. Backhausz and B. Szegedy, Action convergence of operators and graphs, Canadian
Journal of Mathematics, 74 (2022), pp. 72–121.
[4] I. Benjamini and O. Schramm, Recurrence of distributional limits of finite planar graphs,
in Selected Works of Oded Schramm, Springer, 2011, pp. 533–545.
[5] J. Berndt, F. Tricerri, and L. Vanhecke, Generalized heisenberg groups, Generalized
Heisenberg Groups and Damek-Ricci Harmonic Spaces, (1995), pp. 21–77.
[6] C. Bick, Isotropy of Angular Frequencies and Weak Chimeras with Broken Symmetry,
Journal of Nonlinear Science, 27 (2017), pp. 605–626.
[7] C. Bick, T. Böhle, and C. Kuehn, Multi-population phase oscillator networks with
higher-order interactions, Nonlinear Differential Equations and Applications NoDEA, 29
(2022), pp. 1–41.
[8] H. Brezis, Functional analysis, Sobolev spaces and partial differential equations, vol. 2,
Springer, 2011.
[9] A. Calka, On local isometries of finitely compact metric spaces, Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 103 (1982), pp. 337–345.
[10] J. Chaika and D. Davis, The typical measure preserving transformation is not an interval
exchange transformation, arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.10425, (2018).
[11] H. Chiba and G. S. Medvedev, The mean field analysis of the Kuramoto model on graphs
I. The mean field equation and transition point formulas, Discrete & Continuous Dynamical
Systems - A, 39 (2019), pp. 131–155.
[12]
, The mean field analysis of the kuramoto model on graphs II. Asymptotic stability of
the incoherent state, center manifold reduction, and bifurcations, Discrete & Continuous
Dynamical Systems - A, 39 (2019), pp. 3897–3921.
[13] B. Csikós and M. Horváth, On the volume of the intersection of two geodesic balls,
Differential Geometry and its Applications, 29 (2011), pp. 567–576.
[14] J.-F. Delmas, D. Dronnier, and P.-A. Zitt, An infinite-dimensional sis model, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.08241, (2020).
[15] L. DeVille and E. Lerman, Modular dynamical systems on networks, Journal of the
European Mathematical Society, 17 (2015), pp. 2977–3013.

36

CHRISTIAN BICK

[16] A. Fathi, Le groupe des transformations de [0, 1] qui préservent la mesure de lebesgue est
un groupe simple, Israel Journal of Mathematics, 29 (1978), pp. 302–308.
[17] R. Frucht, Herstellung von graphen mit vorgegebener abstrakter gruppe, Compositio Mathematica, 6 (1939), pp. 239–250.
[18] M. A. Gkogkas and C. Kuehn, Graphop mean-field limits for kuramoto-type models,
SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems, 21 (2022), pp. 248–283.
[19] C. Godsil and G. F. Royle, Algebraic graph theory, vol. 207, Springer Science & Business
Media, 2001.
[20] M. Golubitsky and I. Stewart, The Symmetry Perspective, vol. 200 of Progress in
Mathematics, Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 2002.
[21] M. Golubitsky, I. Stewart, and D. G. Schaeffer, Singularities and Groups in
Bifurcation Theory. Vol. II, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1988.
[22] J. Haezendonck, Abstract lebesgue-rohlin spaces, Bull. Soc. Math. Belg, 25 (1973), pp. 243–
258.
[23] P. R. Halmos, Lectures on ergodic theory, Courier Dover Publications, 2017.
[24] P. R. Halmos and J. von Neumann, Operator methods in classical mechanics, ii, Annals
of Mathematics, (1942), pp. 332–350.
[25] D. Kaliuzhnyi-Verbovetskyi and G. S. Medvedev, The mean field equation for the
kuramoto model on graph sequences with non-lipschitz limit, SIAM Journal on Mathematical
Analysis, 50 (2018), pp. 2441–2465.
[26] F. P. Kemeth, S. W. Haugland, and K. Krischer, Symmetries of Chimera States,
Physical Review Letters, 120 (2018), p. 214101.
[27] P. Kloeden and J. Mustard, Constructing permutations that approximate lebesgue
measure preserving dynamical systems under spatial discretization, International Journal of
Bifurcation and Chaos, 7 (1997), pp. 401–406.
[28] M. Kohan, Answer to “Can a continuous map S 2 → S 2 preserve orthogonality without being
an isometry?”. https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/53499. Accessed: 2023-0118.
[29] C. Kuehn, Network dynamics on graphops, New Journal of Physics, 22 (2020), p. 053030.
[30] C. Lancellotti, On the Vlasov Limit for Systems of Nonlinearly Coupled Oscillators
without Noise, Transport Theory and Statistical Physics, 34 (2005), pp. 523–535.
[31] L. Lovász, Large networks and graph limits, vol. 60, American Mathematical Soc., 2012.
[32] L. Lovász and B. Szegedy, The automorphism group of a graphon, Journal of Algebra,
421 (2015), pp. 136–166.
[33] J. Lu, X. Yu, G. Chen, and D. Cheng, Characterizing the synchronizability of small-world
dynamical networks, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, 51 (2004),
pp. 787–796.
[34] Y. Maistrenko, O. Sudakov, O. Osiv, and V. Maistrenko, Chimera states in three
dimensions, New Journal of Physics, 17 (2015), p. 073037.
[35] G. S. Medvedev, Small-world networks of kuramoto oscillators, Physica D: Nonlinear
Phenomena, 266 (2014), pp. 13–22.
[36] G. S. Medvedev, The Nonlinear Heat Equation on Dense Graphs and Graph Limits, SIAM
Journal on Mathematical Analysis, 46 (2014), pp. 2743–2766.
[37] G. S. Medvedev and X. Tang, Stability of twisted states in the kuramoto model on cayley
and random graphs, Journal of Nonlinear Science, 25 (2015), pp. 1169–1208.
[38] G. S. Medvedev and J. D. Wright, Stability of Twisted States in the Continuum
Kuramoto Model, SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems, 16 (2017), pp. 188–203.
[39] N. T. Nhu, The group of measure preserving transformations of the unit interval is an
absolute retract, Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, (1990), pp. 515–522.
[40] E. Omel’chenko and E. Knobloch, Chimerapedia: coherence–incoherence patterns in
one, two and three dimensions, New Journal of Physics, 21 (2019), p. 093034.
[41] M. J. Panaggio and D. M. Abrams, Chimera states on a flat torus, Physical review
letters, 110 (2013), p. 094102.

DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS ON GRAPH LIMITS AND THEIR SYMMETRIES

37

[42] L. M. Pecora, F. Sorrentino, A. M. Hagerstrom, T. E. Murphy, and R. Roy,
Cluster synchronization and isolated desynchronization in complex networks with symmetries,
Nature Communications, 5 (2014), p. 4079.
[43] A. Pikovsky, M. Rosenblum, and J. Kurths, Synchronization: A Universal Concept in
Nonlinear Sciences, Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[44] F. A. Rodrigues, T. K. D. Peron, P. Ji, and J. Kurths, The Kuramoto model in
complex networks, Physics Reports, 610 (2016), pp. 1–98.
[45] V. A. Rokhlin, On the fundamental ideas of measure theory, Matematicheskii Sbornik, 67
(1949), pp. 107–150.
[46] I. Sciriha, A characterization of singular graphs, (2007).
[47] S. H. Strogatz, Sync: The Emerging Science of Spontaneous Order, Penguin, 2004.
[48] S. H. Strogatz and R. E. Mirollo, Stability of incoherence in a population of coupled
oscillators, Journal of Statistical Physics, 63 (1991), pp. 613–635.
[49] P. Walters, An introduction to ergodic theory, vol. 79, Springer Science & Business Media,
2000.
[50] O. Weinberger and P. Ashwin, From coupled networks of systems to networks of states
in phase space, Discrete & Continuous Dynamical Systems - B, 23 (2018), pp. 2043–2063.
[51] D. A. Wiley, S. H. Strogatz, and M. Girvan, The size of the sync basin, Chaos: An
Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 16 (2006), p. 015103.

