Traces of the Other – Are DMT Entities Real?
DMT Phenomenology in the Framework of Conscious Realism
Andrew R. Gallimore1,2† Niﬀe Hermansson3
1.
2.
3.
4.
†

Donald D. Hoﬀman3,4

Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology (OIST), Okinawa, Japan.
Noonautics.
The Trace Institute.
University of California, Irvine.

andrew.gallimore@oist.jp

Abstract.
Encounters with apparently autonomous and intelligent non-human entities are a striking and recurrent feature of high-dose N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) experiences.
Such encounters are typically interpreted as complex hallucinations derived from internally generated brain activity, although many features of the DMT state remain a
challenge to explain within the standard neuroscientiﬁc paradigm. Here, we explore an
alternative hypothesis grounded in the conscious realism framework, in which reality
consists of interacting conscious agents and perception functions as a species-speciﬁc
interface rather than a veridical representation of an objective world. Crucially, the
space of conscious agents we can normally perceive and interact with represents only a
thin slice of the agent network that comprises the totality of reality and is partly determined by representational limits set by the qualia kernel that governs transitions between experiential states.
We propose that DMT induces a profound perturbation of our perceptual interface, expanding the accessible region of experience space and allowing consciousness to reach
regions with entirely diﬀerent dynamical regimes under the qualia kernel. Under such
conditions, normally imperceptible agents may inﬂuence experience, leaving perceptible
“traces” in its dynamics that can be rendered as stable, coherent, and meaningful
structure and experienced as the abundantly populated, inordinately complex alternate
worlds typical of the DMT state. This framework enables us to distinguish between internally generated hallucinations and experiences exhibiting structured, stable, and
causally eﬃcacious dynamics consistent with interactions with normally imperceptible
conscious agents.Rather than asserting the reality of DMT entities, we draw on the
phenomenology of the DMT state, models of psychedelic brain dynamics, and the formalism of conscious agent theory to derive testable predictions and propose experimental paradigms to assess whether DMT experiences can be constrained by external
variables or exhibit non-trivial intersubjective correlations. The outcome of such experiments may have profound implications for our understanding of perception, consciousness, and the structure of reality.

1

Introduction.

For most in the modern West, the idea that we live in a mechanistic and material world
built from physical components is accepted as an obvious and undeniable fact. Although
materialist ontologies can be traced back to ancient atomism (e.g., Democritus, Epicurus,
and Lucretius), it was in early modern Europe that this paradigm became ﬁrmly established, as spiritual and mystical descriptions of nature were progressively excluded from
scientiﬁc discussion and matter planted ﬁrmly at the ground of reality. By the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries, materialism (or physicalism) had come to dominate Western
scientiﬁc thought, with physical matter and energy regarded as primary and consciousness typically treated as an emergent phenomenon, in principle reducible to underlying
physical, neural, or functional processes [1-3].
But this view certainly isn’t universal across all human cultures: If you look to indigenous animistic and shamanistic cultures, Hindu and Buddhist cosmologies, Daoism, and
even mystical sects within Islam, Judaism, and Christianity, you won’t ﬁnd an inert,
rule-governed super-galactic machine but a living, intentional cosmos permeated by gods,
spirits, and other discarnate non-human intelligences [4-7]. Naturally, such magical and
mystical beliefs have been roundly rejected by Western materialism, as visions, voices,
and other encounters with normally unseen discarnate beings are summarily dismissed
as mere hallucination and the symptoms of a mind gone awry.
Yet despite more than two centuries of commitment to this materialist model of reality,
the central problem it introduced remains unresolved. While the neuroscientiﬁc literature
is ﬁlled with systematic correlations between conscious experience and brain activity, it
has failed to explain how or why subjective conscious experience should arise from objective physical processes [8, 9]. This diﬃculty, now widely known as the Hard Problem
of consciousness, suggests that the assumption of matter’s ontological primacy may itself
have been a critical misstep in the history of science.
In response, a growing number of contemporary theories reverse this foundational
assumption by treating consciousness, rather than matter, as fundamental. Giulio Tononi’s Integrated Information Theory (IIT), for example, proposes that consciousness is
identical to a system’s intrinsic causal structure and, as such, is not emergent from
physical substrates so much as realized wherever a system’s integrated information is
non-zero [10, 11]. More radically, the theory of conscious realism, the framework discussed in this paper, abandons the assumption of mind-independent physical objects
altogether, proposing instead that reality is composed entirely of interacting conscious
agents [12] ]. That is, the world consists of (and only of) conscious agents and it is this
network of conscious agents that gives rise to the experience of space, time, and the
objects within it. The question then is not “How does consciousness emerge from physical
matter?” but, rather, “How does the experience of the physical world and its laws, as we
humans know them, arise from the interaction of conscious agents?” In this model, the

world we perceive is not fundamental, but more like a user interface that presents a
simpliﬁed, species-speciﬁc model of the underlying conscious agent network [13, 14]. Our
perceptions, in this view, are akin to icons on a desktop – they carry information useful
for survival, but they do not faithfully depict the true causal structure of reality.
This interface theory of perception is bolstered by evolutionary models showing that
natural selection tends to favour ﬁtness over truth. Previous work in evolutionary game
theory has demonstrated that perceptual systems tuned purely to objective truth are
routinely outcompeted by those tuned to ﬁtness payoﬀs [14], and theoretical models have
shown that, as the complexity of the environment grows, the probability that veridical
perceptions are favoured by evolution approaches zero [15, 16]. In short, our perceptions
evolved to guide adaptive behaviours, not to reveal truth. As such, it’s entirely plausible
that what we take for the “physical world” is merely a species-speciﬁc adaptive representation. Space-time itself may be just one data format or “headset” for conscious agents
– one that humans happen to use [17]. Indeed, many physicists are now abandoning the
assumption that space-time is fundamental. For example, candidate approaches to quantum gravity suggest that space-time breaks down as a valid description of reality at very
small scales or high energies, while novel frameworks in fundamental physics increasingly
lean towards the possibility that space-time is emergent [18, 19].
If we accept, as a working hypothesis, that consciousness (in the form of interacting
conscious agents) is fundamental and that the world we perceive is a mere interface, an
obvious question arises: Can we see beyond the interface? Our ordinary perceptions only
show us a tiny, ﬁltered slice of reality, populated by those agents that were relevant to
our evolutionary ancestors. Conscious realism predicts that there could exist countless
other conscious agents – potentially of arbitrarily high complexity or completely unfamiliar form – that we normally do not perceive at all [20]. We might expect that these
“hidden” agents do not appear as ordinary objects (or living creatures) in our 3D spacetime world because their properties cannot be represented within the constraints of our
human sensory interface. The central hypothesis explored in this paper is that certain
alterations of consciousness represent perturbations of the interface that enable it to
represent structures and dynamics that are informative of the conscious agent network
but normally lie beyond its representational reach. In particular, we propose that the
powerful naturally-occurring psychedelic N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) may transiently transform the human perceptual interface in such a way that normally “invisible”
conscious agents become perceivable.
This hypothesis is motivated by striking phenomenological reports from DMT users:
Unlike other classic psychedelics, such as LSD and psilocybin, DMT, at suﬃciently high
doses, induces a complete transformation of the subjective world: Users commonly describe being transported to what appears to be a fully autonomous alternate reality
populated by a panoply of apparently extremely intelligent, non-human entities [21-25].

The standard view in neuroscience is that these experiences are merely particularly elaborate hallucinations. However, as we will discuss, the DMT state possesses a number of
characteristics that challenge this assumption. As such, we present this alternative hypothesis as consistent with a consciousness-ﬁrst ontology, and articulate clear experimental predictions that could falsify (or lend credence to) the notion that some DMTinduced encounters should be treated as perceptions of “other” consciousnesses.

2

The Conscious Realism Model.

Within the conscious realism formalism [17, 20, 26], a conscious agent (CA) has just four
assumed properties: qualia, choice, action, and a sequencing of qualia. The possible experiences – qualia – of a CA are represented by a measurable space, (X, 𝒳) (a set X
together with a sigma-algebra on the set. i.e. a collection of subsets of X satisfying certain
closure properties) since, at a minimum, we must speak of the probability that a CA has
some experience and a measurable space is a minimal formalism that allows this. Likewise, the possible actions of a CA and the possible states of the world the CA interacts
with (including itself) are represented by measurable spaces, (G, 𝒢) and (W, 𝒲), respectively.
A key intuition is that, within this formalism of conscious agent theory, consciousness
involves three processes: perception, decision, and action. In the process of perception, a
CA interacts with the world and, as a consequence, has conscious experiences. In the
process of decision, a CA chooses what actions to take based on the conscious experiences
it has. In the process of action, the CA interacts with the world in light of that decision
and aﬀects the state of the world (the network of CAs). These inﬂuences are modelled
as Markov kernels: If we assume a ﬁnite countable set of states, the perception kernel,
P, is a (Markov) transition matrix that describes the probability that, for all x ∈ X, a
CA transitions to qualia state, x, given a particular state of the world, w. The decision
kernel, D, similarly describes the probability that a CA chooses action, g, given a particular qualia state, x. And the action kernel, A, describes the probability that the world
(the network of CAs) transitions to state, w, given the action of the CA, g.
So, overall, we can represent a CA by a 7-tuple:
CA = 1(X, 𝒳), (G, 𝒢), (W, 𝒲), P, D, A, N5
where (X, 𝒳) is a measurable space of qualia, (G, 𝒢) is a measurable space of actions,
(W, 𝒲) is a measurable space constituting the set of states of the collection of the network of all CAs, N is an integer that counts the sequence of experiences, and
P: W × 𝒳 → [0,1]
D: X × 𝒢 → [0,1]
A: G × 𝒲 → [0,1]

are Markov kernels.
For a conscious agent (CA), we deﬁne the qualia kernel Q as the composition of its
decision, action, and perception kernels:
Q = DAP: X × 𝒳 → [0,1].
Again assuming a ﬁnite set of discrete countable states, Q(e,e’) is simply the probability that, given the current state, e, the next state will be e’. In other words, Q is a
Markov kernel describing the transition probabilities between experience states. The
triple (X, 𝒳, Q) (i.e. the measurable space of experiences together with the qualia kernel
dynamics) thus describes the evolution of the agent’s subjective experience.

A central concept within this model is that of perception between agents. What does
it mean for one agent to perceive another agent? Let agent A have experience space X! ,
qualia kernel Q ! = D! A! P! , and perception kernel P! : W → X! . Let agent B be deﬁned
in the same way, with experience space X" , qualia kernel Q " = D" A" P" , and action kernel
A" : G" → W. Now, we can ask: What does it mean for A to “perceive” B?
Agent A does not have direct access to the experience space X" of agent B. Instead,
any inﬂuence of B on A must be mediated through the world. Speciﬁcally, the experiences of B drive its decisions via D" , which in turn generate actions in G" . These actions
alter the world via A" , and the resulting world states give rise – through the perception
kernel P! – to probability distributions over states in X! . Thus, the only channel through
which A can “perceive” B is:

X" D" → G" A" → W P! → X!

We can use kernel composition to deﬁne the eﬀective channel:
Φ ∶= P! A" D"
as the induced Markov kernel from X" to X! . For each x" ∈ X" , Φ(x" ,⋅) is a probability
measure on X! that gives the conditional distribution of the next experience for A given
that the current experience for B is x" (i.e. resulting from B’s decision and action dynamics followed by A’s perception). Thus, Φ speciﬁes how states of B probabilistically
inﬂuence the experiences of A (if at all), rather than deﬁning a deterministic mapping
between their experience spaces. As such, if A’s perception kernel P! is sensitive to some
subset of the world states inﬂuenced by B’s actions, then the dynamics of B can inﬂuence
the dynamics of A.

Formally, this relationship can be captured by the notion of a trace. Let S ⊆ X! denote
the subset of states in X! that have a nonzero probability of being the next experience
for A under the induced channel Φ: = P! A" D" . The dynamics on S, together with their
induced transition structure, deﬁne a trace kernel on S, obtained by restricting attention
to these states and incorporating transitions through states outside S. (S is a trace induced by Q " and represents the set of states within X! that are possible under the
inﬂuence – mediated through the channel Φ – of the actions of B). That is, it describes
the eﬀective evolution of those aspects of B’s dynamics that contribute to the dynamics
of A’s experience via its perception kernel. This does not imply that A has direct access
to B’s internal structure or dynamics, nor even that B’s dynamics are identiﬁable or
representable as such, but simply that A’s experience may exhibit statistical eﬀects that
are inﬂuenced by B’s behaviour. In short, A perceives B when the actions of B have an
impact on the updates of A’s experience.
Crucially, the fact that B performs actions on the world does not in itself imply that
those actions will inﬂuence the experience of A. P! is itself constrained: it is only responsive to a subset of world states in W, and if there is no overlap between the world states
inﬂuenced by B’s actions and those to which P! is sensitive, then B has no inﬂuence on
the dynamics of A’s experience. Although B continues to perform actions on the world,
none of its eﬀects propagate through P! to inﬂuence A’s experience. As far as A’s experience dynamics are concerned, B plays no role. Or, in short, B is imperceptible to A.
More generally, since the perception kernel is sensitive only to a subset of possible world
states, by assumption, no agent has access to the full structure of the underlying agent
network. Rather, each agent learns or evolves to selectively respond to a restricted range
of inﬂuences while ﬁltering out the others. In this sense, a conscious agent’s experience
may be shaped by only a limited subset of the broader network of agents that comprise
reality.
Furthermore, even if there is overlap between the world states aﬀected by B’s actions
and those to which P! is sensitive, the presence of this inﬂuence does not guarantee or
even imply that A will have any particular type of experience. The possible content of
A’s interface is speciﬁc to A itself and, although B’s actions on the world might inﬂuence
A’s experience, the experiences of A and the transitions between them are determined
entirely by A’s experience space and qualia kernel. We can’t, for example, make the
claim that just because B is a conscious agent that inﬂuences A’s experiences, that B
will somehow be represented in A’s interface as some kind of “agent” or indeed as any
kind of recognisable structure. In fact, in the conscious realism framework, the distinction
between “agents” and “non-agents” (e.g. inanimate objects) does not correspond to a
fundamental ontological diﬀerence (since reality consists of and only of conscious agents).
Rather, it reﬂects diﬀerences in how patterns of inﬂuence from other conscious agents
are organized within an agent’s experience. Since all aspects of the interface are

generated by the agent’s experience space and qualia kernel, what appears as “agentic”
corresponds to patterns of dynamics within the interface that give rise to some qualia of
encountering another agent. There is no single minimal, necessary, condition for this.
Diﬀerent constellations of patterns can give rise to such qualia: visual form, motion,
voice, intentionality, resistance, responsiveness, felt presence, informational content, and
so on. Note that this, necessarily, includes the experience of encountering and interacting
with another human being or animal, but also completely diﬀerent experiences, such as
talking to an LLM passing the Turing test, or simply "feeling a presence". And, of course,
hallucinations (such as the "internally generated" experience of talking with a deceased
relative) are also represented as agentic dynamics in the interface. By contrast, “nonagentic” dynamics correspond to patterns that are more tightly constrained, lower-dimensional, or more directly coupled to the surrounding experience, and which do not
exhibit the same degree of apparent independence or internal variability and would include all types of qualia that are not perceived as agents.
Overall, whether the inﬂuence of another conscious agent gives rise to agentic or nonagentic dynamics depends not only on that agent’s underlying dynamics, but also on the
structure of the observer’s perception channel, experience space, and qualia kernel. As
such, the same underlying agent may give rise to agentic dynamics in one observer’s
experience and non-agentic or even entirely incoherent dynamics in another’s, reﬂecting
diﬀerences in how the trace of its inﬂuence is organized and stabilized within each observer’s interface. There is never any direct mapping between the structure and dynamics
of an agent and how its trace is represented in the interface of another agent.

3

Evolution of the Interface.

Within the conscious realism framework and under the ﬁtness-beats-truth theorem
[14], evolution is understood not as a process that shapes perceptual systems to accurately represent an objective, mind-independent world, but rather as one that tunes
the dynamics of conscious agents to maximise ﬁtness. In this view, ﬁtness refers to the
capacity of an agent to survive and reproduce within the network of interacting agents,
and perceptual experiences are shaped to guide adaptive behaviour rather than to reﬂect underlying reality [16, 27]. The perception and qualia kernels of an agent are thus
sculpted to encode information that is useful for action, not information that is veridical, while simultaneously limiting the region of the agent’s experience space that is
typically explored under its dynamics. As a result, an agent’s experiential interface can
be understood as a species-speciﬁc, ﬁtness-optimised system that both ﬁlters and
transforms the underlying dynamics of other agents and restricts the range of experiential states that are eﬀectively accessible, thereby shaping a structured domain of experience that supports adaptive interaction with a limited subset of the broader agent
network.

In Markovian terms, this corresponds to the dynamics being concentrated within a
subset of the experience space that is commonly visited and exhibits stable, recurrent
behaviour under the qualia kernel. Under typical conditions, the agent’s experience remains within this region, giving rise to a structured and apparently shared subset of
experience that may be understood as a Consensus Reality Space (CRS) across similarly
structured agents. If the experience space is imagined as a vast landscape of possible
states, the CRS can be viewed as a basin of attraction that both limits which experiences
are typically reached and shapes which inﬂuences from other agents are able to register
within the interface.
Notably, conscious realism suggests that the structure of space-time itself is an emergent property of qualia space dynamics. Recent work by Hoﬀman et al. has conjectured
that the 3+1-dimensional world we experience is not a fundamental feature of objective
reality but merely a coordinatization of our interface; the format of experience that
evolution has landed upon for tracking and interacting with the kinds of conscious agent
dynamics that mattered for survival [20]. Three spatial dimensions might, for example,
be just enough to represent the complexity, structure, and dynamical inﬂuences of the
conscious agents we need to perceive and interact with, without wasting resources on
unnecessary complexity and dimensionality. Naturally, this dramatically limits the kinds
of conscious agents that can be perceived and rendered in our interface. The obvious
question then is, what would it take for a human observer, with a restricted experience
space and qualia kernel dynamics, to perceive conscious agent dynamics that are not
normally represented within our interface?
An important aspect of the conscious realism model is that it allows us to meaningfully characterize and compare the structure and dynamics of conscious agents. Agents
may diﬀer not only in the number of experiential states they can occupy, but also in the
pattern of adjacencies and dependencies among those states determined by the qualia
kernel. Some agents may have relatively sparse and locally organized adjacency structures, so that changes in experience unfold through limited, sequential transitions. Others may be deﬁned by much denser or more globally constrained adjacency relations, in
which many experiential states are mutually adjacent and transitions depend on relations
across large portions of the state space at once, rather than on a small number of local
features. Crucially, there is no upper bound on the size of the state space of a Markov
process, and even for a ﬁxed ﬁnite state space there are an uncountably inﬁnite number
of distinct transition kernels and, as such, an inﬁnite variety of possible distinct conscious
agents. In fact, for a conscious agent with an experience space consisting of n distinct
states, the set of all possible Markovian transition structures on those states can be
represented as an n(n − 1)-dimensional geometric object known as the Markov polytope
M# [28]. Each point in this polytope corresponds to a distinct Markov kernel, specifying
a complete set of probabilistic transition rules between experiential states. Even for
modest values of n, the space of possible transition structures is already vast (even for

an experience space with just ten states, the Markov polytope is a 90-dimensional object
with ten billion vertices, with each point within the polytope corresponding to a fundamentally diﬀerent way in which experience could evolve over time). In this sense, the
Markov polytope captures an astronomically rich family of possible experiential dynamics, emphasizing that the framework permits an enormous diversity of conscious agents
even before any additional structure or constraints are imposed.
As such, reality may consist of a practically inﬁnite number of conscious agents exhibiting an incomprehensibly vast variety of dynamical structures. The overwhelming
majority of these would be entirely imperceptible to us, not because of spatial separation
or concealment, but because we normally occupy a region of the broader experience
space landscape with associated qualia and perception kernel structures that have been
sculpted to perceive and represent traces of a thin slice of the conscious agent network.
Most conscious agents perform actions on the world that do not give rise to states to
which our perception channel is sensitive. And even when such inﬂuence is present, it
need not give rise to coherent or intelligible patterns within human experience. If the
dynamics induced by such agents are not well supported by the structure of our experience space and qualia kernel (for example, by requiring richer dependencies, higherdimensional relations, or alternative transition structure than our interface can support),
then their inﬂuence may fail to appear as stable or interpretable patterns, and may
instead be ﬁltered out, transformed, or rendered as noise or other non-agentic dynamics.
In this sense, there likely exist a vast number of conscious agents whose inﬂuence either
does not register in our experience at all, or whose actions induce dynamics within our
experience space that exceed the range of patterns that our interface can sustain as
coherent structure. Importantly, however, this should not be understood as implying
that there exists a more complete or “truer” form of experience prior to this ﬁltering:
the world state itself is not directly accessible, and there is no canonical or “correct” way
of representing it. Rather, the perceptual interface both constrains and constructs experience, selectively highlighting, organizing, and in some cases enriching aspects of the
underlying dynamics of the conscious agent network in forms suited to the agent.
However, there is no reason to assume that the perceptual and dynamical constraints
imposed by our qualia and perception kernels within the CRS should apply outside of
it. Whereas the applied qualia and perception kernels shaped by evolutionary pressures
determine the range and types of conscious agents we can perceive within the CRS,
absent such pressures within the broader experience space the range of perceivable agents
might be entirely diﬀerent and may give rise to patterns of inﬂuence that do not simply
extend those found in consensus reality, but instead reﬂect entirely diﬀerent regimes of
dynamical structure. As such, perceiving normally imperceptible conscious agents might
be as simple as applying a robust perturbation of our experience space to reach out of
the CRS and open up states and dynamics such that a normally imperceptible agent’s

inﬂuence on our experience space can be rendered as stable, coherent, and meaningful
structure that would normally be beyond our representational reach.
To use an analogy: If you open a JPEG ﬁle on your computer using a photo app, you
will be presented with an image that immediately makes sense. If you open the same ﬁle
using a word processor app, you’re likely to be greeted by an entirely incomprehensible
mess of letters, numbers, and other exotic symbols. Both apps are using the same data
encoded in the ﬁle but how they represent this data is entirely diﬀerent. The photo app
doesn’t generate a more accurate or true representation of the ﬁle data, but it does
render the data in a form that is obviously more meaningful to a human observer. In an
analogous manner, while we can never have access to the internal dynamics of another
agent, the ability of our interface to represent the “data” received via our perception
channel in a meaningful form is determined by the structure of our experience space,
qualia kernel dynamics, and our perception kernel. For example, a data structure that
could usefully be represented as a 5-dimensional object cannot be rendered as such in
the human interface and might be ignored or treated as noise. In order to form a coherent
and meaningful representation of such data, the human mind might need to enter an
extraordinarily unusual state in which, for example, its standard 3+1-dimensional perceptual interface is replaced by a higher-dimensional or non-Euclidean format. During
such an altered state, the forms and content comprising the person’s experience would
radically transform, reﬂecting the structure of the previously hidden agent’s inﬂuence on
the experience space of the observer.

4

Traces of the Other.

There are many examples of systems in which a suﬃciently robust perturbation (such
as an increase in an energy parameter) causes an eﬀective expansion of the accessible
state space, as new states or degrees of freedom become dynamically accessible: liquid–
gas phase transitions [29, 30]; activation of rotational and vibrational modes in molecules
[31]; the activation of higher-energy degrees of freedom in particle physics [32]; and the
ﬂattening of the energy landscape with increasing ‘temperature’ in recurrent neural networks [33, 34]. Likewise, multiple human studies have revealed that psychedelics, by
stimulating a subset of neurons in the deeper layers of the cortex, dramatically increase
the entropy of cortical activity and induce a more ﬂuid “hot” state in which the cortex
explores an increased repertoire of states and generally exhibits higher levels of neural
complexity [35-42]. The subjective eﬀects of psychedelics comport well with the observed
eﬀects on neural activity, indicating that the experience space is nudged into a more
ﬂuid and dynamically exploratory state outside of the CRS that at least hints at the
kinds of dynamic complexity that might be required to support traces of normally imperceptible conscious agents. However, at usual dose levels at least, most psychedelic
users rarely report encounters that might be construed as the perception of otherwise
undetectable conscious agents. It’s plausible that a more profound restructuring of the

experience space might be required to allow it to support traces of dynamics that are
exotic when compared to those normally encountered in consensus reality, and perhaps
higher-dimensional geometric and topological structures of conscious agents with unusual
Markovian dynamics. Naturally, such a profound perturbation of our experience space
wouldn’t simply cause otherwise hidden conscious agents to “pop up” as supplementary
icons in our interface, but would likely entail an almost complete restructuring of the
content, dynamics, and ﬂow of conscious experience itself – a complete replacement of
the normal interface with one that transcends the usual topological and geometric structures imposed by our standard 3+1D interface. One such candidate molecule that does
appear to induce such a perturbation of our experience space is the naturally-occurring
psychedelic, N,N-dimethyltryptamine, DMT.
DMT is set apart from the other classical
psychedelics, such as LSD and psilocybin, in
that, when vaporised or injected, it rapidly and
reliably induces a state in which users report
being completely immersed in a bizarre, often
bewildering “alternate reality” that feels just as
real as (and often more real than) ordinary waking life [21-24, 43]. Users commonly describe entering otherworldly landscapes replete with inordinately complex, fractal visuals, and impossible higher-dimensional geometries. And, notably, these alternate worlds are often populated
with a variety of apparently highly intelligent non-human entities. A large-scale analysis
of 3,778 DMT trip reports found that entity encounters were reported in about 45% of
experiences, often involving beings described as humanoid, alien, or spiritual in nature
(commonly described as “machine elves,” insectoid or reptilian creatures, deities, jesters,
etc.) [44]. Other studies report similar entity prevalences [22], although one naturalistic
setting study reported non-human entity encounters in 72% of subjects [45]. Many of
these entities are reported to behave autonomously and to communicate with the experiencer (through language or telepathy), sometimes imparting information or lessons.
Remarkably, across thousands of reports, certain motifs repeat: entering a tunnel or
portal; arriving in a “waiting room” or hyper-technological chamber; meeting a guiding
or “pedagogical” being; experiencing a sense of higher-dimensional space; and witnessing
scenes of advanced technology or alien architecture.
The standard explanation for these experiences is that they’re a particularly elaborate
form of hallucination or perhaps related to dream visions [46]. Evolutionary neurobiology
suggests that the human brain possesses innate cognitive modules for detecting agency,
faces, and social presence [47, 48]. It has been hypothesised that these modules might
start generating imagery of autonomous beings when top-down control of perception is

loosened (as in psychedelic states) [49]. Indeed, Timmermann and others have hypothesized that DMT suppresses high-level priors and the default mode network in the brain,
leading to a ﬂood of unconstrained bottom-up signalling (especially from the medial
temporal lobe, where memory, emotion, and face/object recognition reside) [50, 51]. This
could produce fully realized “entity” experiences by essentially allowing the brain’s pattern detectors to impute agency and form to random neural noise.
However, similar loosening of top-down control occurs during dream sleep and in
certain psychotic conditions [52-54]. In both states, neuroimaging studies implicate medial temporal and higher-order visual networks as key contributors to internally generated visual imagery [53-55]. Dreams, in particular, tend to be continuations of the normal
waking world, with the brain drawing on learned and stored object models when rendering dream environments, which are generally populated by humans and animals encountered in everyday life [56-59]. Likewise, the hallucinations of psychotic patients tend to
be “similar to real visual perceptions, as most of them are normal sized, solid, and
anchored in external space,” and, as in dreams, the majority of hallucinated characters
are “normal-sized, normal-appearing people.”[60, 61] This pattern is unsurprising since,
within the materialist framework at least, the brain’s innate cognitive modules evolved
to detect and model other humans and animals encountered in the ancestral environment,
and human neurodevelopment involves learning to construct a subjective world as a
model of that environment and its inhabitants. Consistent with this, evidence from
dream research in children suggests that the brain’s ability to construct a coherent subjective world and its occupants in the absence of sensory input is not fully innate, but
develops gradually from infancy through adolescence [62, 63]. Accordingly, when freed
from top-down constraints, it is entirely expected that spontaneously generated visual
imagery would predominantly consist of humans and other familiar animals.
Strikingly, however, humans – by far the most commonly encountered organism in the
natural waking environment – are only rarely encountered in the DMT state (<5%) [44,
45, 64], which tend to be populated by beings that are not only neither human nor
animal, but far transcend the human in their complexity and behaviour. It remains a
challenge to explain how and why, when perturbed by DMT, the human brain should so
consistently generate imagery of apparently intelligent beings that often have absolutely
no obvious referent in the human environment, inhabiting entirely alien worlds of staggering structural, dynamical, and narrative complexity that bear no relationship whatsoever to the normal waking world or to human experience, either now or at any time in
our evolutionary history. So, whilst the standard hallucination explanation must remain
as the default, most parsimonious explanation for DMT’s eﬀects, considering and empirically testing alternative hypotheses concerning the underlying structure and origin of
these experiences is both warranted and scientiﬁcally tractable.

Our working hypothesis is that some DMT entities might correspond to traces of
conscious agents with Markovian dynamics that are, compared to consensus reality,
highly unusual or exotic and, as such, are normally imperceptible but which can be
perceived when DMT alters the structure and dynamics of our interface, allowing human
consciousness to reach areas of the experience space landscape outside of the CRS where
some aspects of the evolved constraints imposed by our qualia and perception kernels no
longer apply. We hypothesise that, in these states, the qualia kernel may become capable
of representing traces of normally imperceptible conscious agent dynamics as stable,
coherent, meaningful, and agentic forms. Indeed, psychedelics, including DMT, appear
to induce a ﬂattening of the cortical state space landscape, reducing the energetic barrier
for transition between cortical states and allowing the cortex to reach and explore novel
states not available during normal waking consciousness [41, 65]. Although we cannot
assume a direct mapping between cortical dynamics observed in neuroimaging data and
the eﬀects on conscious agent dynamics, such data does represent, in some aspect at
least, the way that some of the eﬀects of DMT are represented in the interface and
comports with the idea that, under the inﬂuence of DMT, consciousness is able to reach
regions of the experience space landscape where the perception of otherwise imperceptible conscious agents becomes possible. And, indeed, certain patterns in DMT reports
align with what one might predict when a human-level conscious agent observes and
interacts with conscious agents that live in and manipulate an entirely diﬀerent experiential manifold than we do:
4.1

Higher-Dimensional Phenomenology.

Many DMT users report explicit experiences of extra spatial dimensions or non-Euclidean geometry, describing the space as “more than 3D” or “hyperdimensional.” For example, one report recounts, “There were way, way more directions in space to look at than
there should have been… More than three dimensions”[66]. Another user reports, “They
[the entities] occupied the fourth spatial dimension, yet I could only perceive them
through my understanding of three-dimensional space… as if I was viewing a tesseract
rotating in 4D.[67]” These descriptions of a perceptual space expanding or warping in
dimensionality are exactly the kind of eﬀect we’d expect if the mind is interfacing with
dynamics that don’t ﬁt into a Euclidean 3D ﬁeld.
Andrés Gómez-Emilsson of the Qualia Research Institute (QRI), an independent
think tank devoted to studying and formally describing the structure and quality of
conscious experience, has proposed a complementary account in which DMT drives consciousness into a regime of extreme energetic excitation, allowing phenomenal space to
reorganize in ways that are not available in ordinary experience [68, 69]. In this model,
a moment of experience can be understood as a distribution of a ﬁnite “energy” across
perceptual and cognitive features, which is continuously redistributed over time. Under
ordinary conditions, phenomenal space reﬂects a balance between the rate at which the

mind detects symmetries and relational structure, and the rate at which such structure
decays. Psychedelics, and DMT in particular, are proposed to signiﬁcantly slow this
decay while increasing the sensitivity to relational structure, allowing patterns to accumulate faster than they can be dissipated. As a result, the internal dynamics of experience begin to exceed what can be stably represented within a three-dimensional geometry,
and phenomenal space reorganizes into forms characterized by non-Euclidean curvature,
higher-dimensional symmetries, and increasingly complex relational structure. The result
is a regime in which experiential objects can exhibit coherence and stability despite
possessing relational properties that cannot be faithfully represented within three dimensions. Interpreted through the conscious realism framework, this suggests that the
DMT user’s consciousness has been pushed into a region of experience space outside of
the CRS that supports representations and transition dynamics that are normally inaccessible in human experience [70, 71].
4.2

Extreme Complexity and “Otherness”.

If DMT allows us to perceive conscious agents with entirely diﬀerent Markovian dynamics to our own consciousness, we might expect them to appear (compared to normal
human or animal behaviour) bewilderingly complex and entirely alien. The subjective
impression might be as if witnessing a supremely advanced technology or intelligence,
far beyond human capabilities. Indeed, many entity encounters on DMT involve beings
who manufacture or manipulate impossibly complex objects in front of the user, as if to
demonstrate their abilities. One such report describes an entity “materializing the most
complex and impossible shapes…transferring as much mathematical and geometric
knowledge as fast as possible… I was getting the feeling that this information was basic
knowledge in their world, like us teaching our toddlers squares, circles, and triangles.”
Another account speaks of “a liquid mind ecology of staggering and alien complexity
[with] geometries transcending what is even vaguely feasible in this three-dimensional
mundane world… Crowding and cramming themselves into my ﬁeld of vision were thousands upon thousands of beings of every imaginable sort and many that were completely
unimaginable… The primordial intelligence being manifest before me was palpable, undeniable, transcendently amazing… It was like being entertained by the 76,000-piece orchestra of an alien civilization in whose classical music each note is not merely a musical
tone, but an entire world, each just as intricate and nuanced as our own.”[72]
These descriptions align with the idea that the operations performed by these entities
appear miraculous only because we observe them from our low-dimensional perspective.
Analogously, a Flatlander seeing a 3D being perform a simple rotation might be baﬄed
by the shape’s apparent changes. In our case, operations that are trivial for an agent in
a higher-dimensional or higher-complexity experiential space might look to us like godlike feats. For example, the amplituhedron is a geometric object deﬁned in a high-dimensional abstract space entirely outside ordinary spacetime, yet it encodes the full

complexity of particle scattering processes that appear extraordinarily complicated when
computed using traditional spacetime-based methods [73]. From our low-dimensional
perspective, the scattering process seems exceedingly complex; from the higher-dimensional perspective, it’s elegant and simple. Analogously, DMT entities might not be “super-intelligent” in a human IQ sense; they might simply be operating in a higher-dimensional experiential space, performing operations that are trivial from their own perspective but exquisitely complex from ours.
Our model speciﬁcally does not assume that these agents possess extraordinary human-like intellect but that they may have dynamical skills (such as manipulating complex multi-dimensional visual forms) that transcend those of any human. For example,
Gómez-Emilsson reports the rapid and error-free colouring of extremely complex, dynamically changing surfaces such that no adjacent regions share the same colour – a
process closely related to the four-colour problem, but applied to highly complex, nonEuclidean, and often hyperbolic surfaces [74]. For humans, solving such problems is a
slow and cognitively demanding process, becoming intractable as the surface grows or
departs from Euclidean geometry. However, in the DMT state, Gómez-Emilsson describes entities colouring surfaces almost instantaneously and repeatedly, as if implementing a form of parallel, constraint-satisfying computation far exceeding the capabilities of even the brightest of humans, in exquisite command of the exotic geometric and
topological structure of the space they occupy.
Another frequently reported “trick” of DMT entities is the ability to simultaneously
change every aspect of their form (colour, shape, movement, etc.) in a coordinated manner without losing coherence. Human mental imagery struggles to keep track of even a
single aspect of a single object (we normally serialize changes). But entities are reported
to, for example, split into dozens of smaller entities and then recombine, or undergo
rapid metamorphosis while still clearly being the same entity. This suggests a global
coherence to their form that might correspond to an underlying structure with many
degrees of freedom orchestrated together – again consistent with a conscious agent with
highly unusual Markovian dynamics.
4.3

Independent Agency and Interaction.

If DMT does indeed allow us to perceive and interact with normally imperceptible conscious agents, we would expect the entities to exhibit behaviours or provide information
consistent with such an interaction. DMT users regularly describe entities that seem
entirely autonomous, in that their behaviour is impossible to predict or anticipate, endlessly surprising, and entirely outside of the user’s control. Many users report being
“taught” by entities, which often takes the form of bewilderingly complex visual performances (such as manifesting complex high-dimensional objects) or “downloads” of vast
amounts of highly complex information [75]. There are also anecdotal accounts of multiple individuals encountering the same entity in separate DMT sessions. If such shared

encounters are genuine traces of the same conscious agent(s), then there should indeed
be correlated aspects of their form and behaviour. Of course, anecdotes are just that,
but such reports will motivate our proposed experimental studies later.
It is important to emphasize that the connections drawn above between DMT phenomenology and the conscious realism framework are suggestive rather than conclusive.
Our task, therefore, is to develop experimental approaches that can distinguish between
diﬀerent classes of experience, in particular between those that exhibit the characteristics
of interaction with other agents and those that do not. In standard neuroscientiﬁc terms,
a hallucination is typically deﬁned as a perception that is not appropriately coupled to
sensory inputs. More broadly, all perceptions are constructed by the brain, which does
not have direct access to an external world, but veridical perceptions are those that are
adaptively connected to environmental structure, whereas hallucinations are not. Within
conscious realism, all perceptions arise from interactions with other conscious agents,
and this includes what are ordinarily termed hallucinations. However, this does not preclude the use of empirical methods to distinguish between diﬀerent types of experiential
dynamics within the interface.
Recall that an agent 𝐴 is said to perceive agent 𝐵 when the actions of 𝐵, mediated
through the channel Φ: = 𝑃$ 𝐴% 𝐷% , inﬂuence the updates of 𝐴’s experience. In such cases,
a subset 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑋$ of 𝐴’s experience space supports a trace of 𝐵’s dynamics, and the resulting transition structure on 𝑆 reﬂects the inﬂuence of 𝐵’s behaviour. As such, if an entity
encounter in the DMT state corresponds to a trace of a conscious agent that is normally
imperceptible (as hypothesised), we should be able to detect evidence of this inﬂuence,
which might include some subset of the following: an entity’s ability to introduce novel
or unanticipated structure into experience; persistence or coherence over time; behaviour
that is not trivially reducible to the subject’s prior expectations or intentions; and the
capacity to inﬂuence other elements of the experiential interface, potentially including
other agents. In addition, such encounters may exhibit some degree of intersubjective
correspondence across observers. Note that this deﬁnition of a “real” entity encounter
mirrors how we might ordinarily distinguish veridical perception from hallucination
within standard physicalist frameworks. In both cases, the key criteria for establishing
veridicality are the presence of structured, stable, and causally eﬃcacious dynamics that
are not reducible to the subject’s internal processes, and which exhibit some degree of
independence and intersubjective consistency. The diﬀerence, therefore, lies not in the
criteria used to identify such experiences, nor in the experimental paradigms required to
study them, but in the theoretical interpretation of what these features signify. In the
CAT framework, they are understood in terms of traces of other agents’ dynamics within
the subject’s experience, rather than in terms of correspondence with an objective physical world.

The next section proposes several experimental approaches, inspired by the conscious
agent theory (CAT) framework, to test the nature of DMT entities. This kind of research
has recently been rendered more feasible by the development of techniques that can
extend the DMT trip from a few minutes to an hour or longer. The extended-state DMT
(DMTx) technique, ﬁrst proposed by Gallimore and Strassman [76], employs targetcontrolled intravenous infusion to establish and maintain a stable brain DMT concentration over time. The technique has already been shown to be safe, eﬀective, and tolerable, with stable psychedelic eﬀects maintained for up to 120 minutes in a research
setting [77-79]. This extended format gives the subject time to explore, observe, and even
conduct tasks in the DMT state in a way that the standard trip doesn’t allow. With the
ability to pause and resume the experience by modulating the infusion rate, DMTx oﬀers
a degree of experimental control unprecedented in psychedelic research. The standard
approach to studying the phenomenology of DMT hasn’t really changed from the earliest
studies in the mid-20th century to the present day: Administer the drug to a volunteer
(often selected only on the basis of them having had some prior experience with psychedelics) and then, immediately following their experience, prompt them to report their
experiences using a combination of questionnaires and free verbal or written accounts
[23]. We ought, instead, to be sending mathematicians to analyse the apparent nonEuclidean structure, symmetry groups, and invariant features of the space; linguists and
semioticians to study the structured language, symbolic systems, and apparent grammars used by the entities and embedded in the environment; anthropologists and comparative mythologists to identify recurring motifs, archetypal forms, and cross-cultural
regularities; computer scientists and complexity theorists, physicists, phenomenologists
and philosophers of mind. The DMTx technique will also be indispensable in conducting
experiments aimed at rigorously testing the hypothesis that the DMT space and its
occupants aren’t merely scientiﬁcally interesting, but that this molecule allows our perceptual systems to support and render traces of normally imperceptible conscious agents.
An important aspect of the conscious realism formalism is that the experience of any
conscious agent at a given point in time is represented as a point in a space of possible
experiences. Each point in this space represents one full moment of experience for the
agent in question. As an example, we assume that, for a human being experiencing
something like waking consensus reality with their eyes open, a moment of experience
will include their current visual experience, inferred 3D object representations, some
audio qualia, some conceptual interpretation of experience (potentially represented as
words and images), emotional content (likely including both primitives such as physical
tensions, as well as some interpretive layers and reactions), mental imagery, and so on.
In a given parametrization, this can, for example, be thought of as a very long string of
numbers encoding the current conﬁguration of qualia in the repertoire of the agent. As
such, an exhaustive representation of a single moment of experience, let alone a path
through experience space, is a complex object deﬁned by a very large number of

parameters. We therefore expect that it will rarely, if ever, be useful to work with anything like an exhaustive or fully general state space.
Instead, for any given experiment utilizing the Conscious Realism framework under
CAT, part of what goes into deﬁning the experimental protocol is the construction of a
tractable state-space representation capable of capturing the phenomena of interest and
producing measurable observables. These might include, for example, speciﬁc properties
of statements that the subject makes about their experience; overlaps between descriptions of experience across subjects; numerical responses, or, in some cases, perhaps even
neuroimaging results. In other words, the formalism is not applied by attempting to
model the totality of experience in full detail, but by selecting an experimentally relevant
representation of experience that is rich enough to capture the structure of the phenomenon of interest while still allowing mathematically precise analysis and empirical comparison.

5

Proposed Experimental Research Programs.

Rather than a single decisive experiment, we suggest a number of complementary experimental paradigms designed to test whether DMT experiences exhibit signatures that
are diﬃcult to reconcile with entirely hallucinatory perceptions. These naturally fall into
two classes: experiments involving a single subject, and experiments involving multiple
subjects.
5.1

Single-subject experiments.

Single-subject paradigms are designed to test whether features of a DMT experience are
systematically constrained by variables outside the subject’s own cognitive and perceptual processes (and, as such, may represent the inﬂuence of normally imperceptible conscious agents). These experiments are designed to be conducted in well-controlled settings using the extended-state DMT infusion technique (DMTx) to allow suﬃcient interaction time.
One class of experiments examines whether an entity encountered during a DMT
experience can reliably track or respond to an external variable unknown to the subject.
The variable may be randomly generated, time-varying, and blinded to both subject and
experimenter during the session. The key question is whether aspects of the experience
(visual features, behaviours attributed to an entity, or reported changes over time) show
statistically signiﬁcant correspondence with the hidden variable beyond what would be
expected by chance. For example, since the DMT state is a characteristically visual and
intensely colourful experience, a pair of colours might be chosen as a binary variable. A
computer, isolated in a separate room from both the subject and experimenters, randomly switches between two states (a blue and a yellow screen, for example). If an entity
is external and cooperative, it may be able to express a stable blue/yellow modulation

that tracks the hidden variable. Standard controls such as randomization, blinding, preregistration of analysis criteria, and comparison with control conditions (e.g., imagination or other psychedelic states) are also essential.
A major limitation of this kind of experiment is that it requires the active cooperation
of the entity, which is obviously not guaranteed. This is where selective recruiting would
be invaluable: There are many anecdotal reports of individuals who claim to regularly
interact with the same entity, even to the point of developing a relationship with the
entity over many months or longer. Such subjects would be ideal candidates for this kind
of experiment without compromising its scientiﬁc validity. The experiment also relies on
the assumption that the entity would have access to the external variable. However, this
limitation can be obviated using another subject (discussed in the following section).
A second class of single-subject experiments focuses not on information transfer, but
on the structure of the experience itself. Since entities encountered in the DMT state are
often described as exhibiting remarkable coherence, agency, or apparent intelligence, it’s
also natural to ask whether they might display abilities that exceed those of humans.
For example, Rodriguez [80] suggested that DMT entities could be asked to perform
mathematical operations (such as ﬁnding the prime factors of large integers) that humans cannot carry out mentally. However, such symbolic and sequential reasoning tasks
primarily test how eﬀectively a human subject can use their own cognitive machinery.
Our model does not predict that DMT entities are more intelligent in the familiar human
sense, but rather that they may instantiate dynamical processes beyond those normally
accessible to human consciousness. As such, the relevant question is not “Are you
smart?”, but “What kinds of dynamical structures can you stably instantiate and control?” From this perspective, the appropriate tests are not diﬃcult symbolic problems,
but probes of an entity’s ability to instantiate, maintain, and transform globally constrained, high-dimensional visual or geometric structures whose coherence requires transition dynamics far richer than those supported by ordinary human cognition. Such tests
might include:
Global constraint satisfaction: Can an entity colour a complex surface so that no
adjacent regions share the same colour (as described by Gomez-Emilsson)?
Stability across simultaneous transformations: Can a DMT entity remain coherent
and identiﬁable while undergoing multiple independent visual changes (such as shape,
colour, motion, or topology) at the same time, rather than handling them sequentially
or collapsing into incoherence?
Long-range temporal coherence: Can a DMT entity initiate a structured visual process
(such as constructing a complex geometric structure), allow it to be interrupted and
displaced by unrelated experiences, and later resume or complete it without any explicit
reminder or cue from the subject?

Obviously, rather than simply recruiting DMT users with substantial experience interacting with entities, these kinds of tests would certainly require individuals who also
possess substantial mathematical knowledge and experience. And, of course, we’d be
relying on the subjective reports of the subjects to determine whether or not a particular
task has been completed successfully by the entity (this highlights why we’re proposing
a number of complementary experimental paradigms rather than reaching for a single
decisive experiment).
5.2

Multiple-subject experiments.

Whereas single-subject experiments test for external constraint on an individual experience, multi-subject paradigms test for shared structure across experiences. In these experiments, multiple subjects (isolated from one another) undergo DMT sessions under
identical conditions. Their reports are later analyzed for correlations, shared features, or
structured correspondences beyond what would be expected by chance. The aim is not
to establish identical experiences, but to test whether independent subjects exhibit nontrivial convergence in reported entities, environments, or informational content. Again,
selective recruiting would likely improve the chances of success: Couples who claim to
have shared experiences, particularly if it involves interacting with the same entity, might
be recruited to test for correlations between individual experiences. Such experimental
set ups might include information deposit and retrieval, in which one of the subjects
deposits information into the DMT space, such as by communicating a randomly generated word or multiple-digit integer to an entity, which is subsequently retrieved from the
entity by the other subject.
As with single-subject paradigms, methodological safeguards such as blinding, standardized reporting frameworks, and preregistered analysis criteria are essential. Across all
paradigms, careful attention must be paid to expectation eﬀects, experimenter bias, and
the interpretive ﬂexibility of retrospective reports. Null results are informative, and positive results would require cautious interpretation. The goal of these proposed programs
is not to presuppose any particular metaphysical conclusion, but to clarify which features
of DMT experiences can be systematically constrained, correlated, or reproduced, and
which cannot.

6

Conclusion.

It is a direct consequence of the conscious realism formalism that the space of possible
conscious agents likely vastly exceeds the subset accessible to ordinary human perception.
Since perception, within this framework, is an interface shaped by evolutionary pressures
rather than a transparent window onto objective reality, there is no reason to assume
that the agents and dynamics most relevant to human survival exhaust the space of what
exists. The question, then, is not whether such agents could exist in principle, but under
what conditions traces of their dynamics might become accessible to human experience.

The DMT state represents an unusually robust and reproducible perturbation of the
human perceptual interface that reliably produces experiences of exquisitely complex,
coherently structured environments, and apparently autonomous entities. While the
standard hallucination explanation remains most widely held, it struggles to explain how
and why the human brain, when perturbed by DMT, so reliably induces such phenomenology that is so complex and coherent and yet, in many ways, entirely disjoint from
normal human experience. Conscious realism provides an alternative interpretive framework in which such experiences could, in principle, be understood as traces of other
conscious agents whose internal dynamics exceed those ordinarily representable within
human experience. Importantly, this interpretation does not depend on attributing human-like intelligence to DMT entities, but instead on diﬀerences in the structure and
complexity of their underlying experiential dynamics, which can be articulated formally
using the language of Markovian dynamics. By framing “alienness” in terms of adjacency
structure, transition dependencies, and representational limits, we can set aside culturally speciﬁc and often poorly deﬁned concepts, such as “plant spirits” or “trans-dimensional beings”, and instead ground the discussion in a precise mathematical framework.
As such, the central question is no longer simply whether DMT entities are “real”, but
whether the human perceptual interface is capable, even temporarily, of perceiving normally imperceptible conscious agents and hosting traces of conscious-agent dynamics
that normally lie beyond its representational reach.
Crucially, the perspective developed here is not insulated from experimental scrutiny.
The possibility that DMT experiences might be systematically constrained by variables
external to the subject, or might exhibit nontrivial structure across individuals, leads
naturally to experimental paradigms that are both falsiﬁable and methodologically sound.
Negative results would strongly constrain external-agent interpretations, while positive
results could have far-reaching implications for our understanding of perception, consciousness, and, perhaps even, reality itself. With the recent development and validation
of the extended-state DMT infusion technique, DMTx, such investigations are now feasible.
Ultimately, our purpose here is not to claim that DMT entities represent external
conscious agents, but to show that, given a formal theory in which consciousness is
fundamental, such a possibility can be coherently formulated and experimentally investigated. Whether this line of inquiry ultimately reinforces the standard hallucination
model or forces us to consider a more radical revision of our assumptions remains an
open question. What matters, from a scientiﬁc perspective, is that the question can be
asked precisely, tested rigorously, and approached with both openness and restraint.

7

Acknowledgements.

This work was partially funded by the 501(c)(3) non-proﬁt Noonautics
(Noonautics.org)

1.
Sedley D. Atomism, ancient. In E N Zalta (Ed), The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (Winter 2018 ed) Stanford University. 2018
2.
Zanotti G. Consciousness, Neuroscience, and Physicalism: Pessimism About
Optimistic Induction. Acta Analytica 2022 38:2. 2022-02-17;38(2). doi: 10.1007/s12136022-00512-5.
3.
Jylkkä J, Railo H. Consciousness as a concrete physical phenomenon.
Consciousness and Cognition. 2019;74. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2019.102779.
4.
Dolan M. Hinduism and Cosmology in India. 2021. doi: 10.1007/978-3-03076511-8_7.
5.
Eliade M. Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy (Bollingen Series).
Princeton: Princetion University Press; 2004.
6.
de Castro EV. Cosmological Deixis and Amerindian Perspectivism. The Journal
of the Royal Anthropological Institute. 1998;4(3):469-88. doi: 10.2307/3034157.
7.
Sadakata A, Nakamura H. Buddhist Cosmology: Philosophy and Origins.
Tokyo: Kosei Publishing Co.; 1997.
8.
Chalmers DJ. Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness. The Character of
Consciousness. 2010/10/07. doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195311105.003.0001.
9.
Chalmers DJ. The puzzle of conscious experience. Sci Am. 1995;273(6):80-6.
doi: 10.1038/scientiﬁcamerican1295-80. PubMed PMID: 8525350.
10.
Tononi G. Consciousness as Integrated Information: a Provisional Manifesto.
Biological Bulletin. 2008;215(3):216-42. PubMed PMID: WOS:000262021400003.
11.
Tononi G. Integrated information theory of consciousness: an updated account.
Archives Italiennes De Biologie. 2012;150(2-3):56-90. PubMed PMID:
WOS:000312480900004.
12.
Hoﬀman DD, Prakash C, Prentner R. Fusions of Consciousness. Entropy
(Basel). 2023;25(1). Epub 20230109. doi: 10.3390/e25010129. PubMed PMID:
36673270; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC9858210.
13.
Prentner R, Hoﬀman DD. Interfacing consciousness. Front Psychol.
2024;15:1429376. Epub 20240715. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1429376. PubMed PMID:
39077200; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC11284140.
14.
Hoﬀman DD, Singh M, Prakash C. The Interface Theory of Perception.
Psychon Bull Rev. 2015;22(6):1480-506. doi: 10.3758/s13423-015-0890-8. PubMed
PMID: 26384988.

15.
Prakash C, Fields C, Hoﬀman DD, Prentner R, Singh M. Fact, Fiction, and
Fitness. Entropy (Basel). 2020;22(5). Epub 20200430. doi: 10.3390/e22050514. PubMed
PMID: 33286286; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC7517005.
16.
Prakash C, Stephens KD, Hoﬀman DD, Singh M, Fields C. Fitness Beats Truth
in the Evolution of Perception. Acta Biotheor. 2021;69(3):319-41. Epub 20201124. doi:
10.1007/s10441-020-09400-0. PubMed PMID: 33231784.
17.
Prakash C, Prakash C. On Invention of Structure in the World: Interfaces and
Conscious Agents. Foundations of Science 2019 25:1. 2019-01-24;25(1). doi:
10.1007/s10699-019-09579-7.
18.
Seiberg N. Emergent Spacetime. The Quantum Structure of Space and Time.
p. 163-213.
19.
Ashtekar A, Bianchi E. A short review of loop quantum gravity. Rep Prog
Phys. 2021;84(4). Epub 20210331. doi: 10.1088/1361-6633/abed91. PubMed PMID:
33691292.
20.
Hoﬀman D, Prakash C, Chattopadhyay S. Traces of Consciousness. 2024. doi:
10.20944/preprints202410.1305.v1.
21.
Gallimore AR. Building Alien Worlds - The Neuropsychological and
Evolutionary Implications of the Astonishing Psychoactive Eﬀects of N,NDimethyltryptamine (DMT). Journal of Scientiﬁc Exploration. 2013;27(3):455-503.
22.
Strassman R. DMT - The Spirit Molecule. 1st ed. Vermont: Park Street Press;
2001.
23.
Strassman R. The varieties of the DMT experience. In: Strassman R, editor.
Inner Paths to Outer Space. 1st ed. Vermont: Park Street Press; 2008. p. 51-80.
24.
Strassman RJ. Human psychopharmacology of N,N-dimethyltryptamine.
Behavioural Brain Research. 1995;73(1-2):121-4. doi: 10.1016/0166-4328(96)00081-2.
PubMed PMID: BCI:BCI199698654316.
25.
Luke D. Discarnate entities and dimethyltryptamine (DMT):
Psychopharmacology, phenomenology and ontology. Journal of the Society for
Psychical Research. 2011;75:26-42.
26.
Fields C, Hoﬀman DD, Prakash C, Singh M. Conscious agent networks: Formal
analysis and application to cognition. Cognitive Systems Research. 2018/01/01;47. doi:
10.1016/j.cogsys.2017.10.003.
27.
Hoﬀman DD. Did we evolve to see reality, or are spacetime and objects just our
user interface? Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2019;1458(1):65-9. Epub 20190808. doi:
10.1111/nyas.14222. PubMed PMID: 31396967.
28.
Golin MJ, Patupat AJL. The Markov-Chain Polytope with Applications.
2024/01/21. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2401.11622.
29.
Swendsen RH. Phase Transitions. An Introduction to Statistical Mechanics and
Thermodynamics. 2019/12/10. doi: 10.1093/oso/9780198853237.003.0017.
30.
Thouless DJ, Thouless DJ. Introduction to Phase Transitions and Critical
Phenomena. Physics Bulletin. 1972-04-01;23(4). doi: 10.1088/0031-9112/23/4/018.

31.
Atkins P, Paula Jd, Keeler J, Atkins P, Paula Jd, Keeler J. Molecular partition
functions. Atkins’ Physical Chemistry. 2022. doi:
10.1093/hesc/9780198847816.003.0069.
32.
Georgi H, Georgi H. Eﬀective Field Theory. Annual Review of Nuclear and
Particle Science. 1993/12/01;43(Volume 43, 1993). doi:
10.1146/annurev.ns.43.120193.001233.
33.
Ackley DH, Hinton GE, Sejnowski TJ. A learning algorithm for boltzmann
machines. Cognitive Science. 1985/01/01;9(1). doi: 10.1016/S0364-0213(85)80012-4.
34.
Kirkpatrick S, Gelatt CD, Vecchi MP. (1983) S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt, Jr.,
and M. P. Vecchi, "Optimization by simulated annealing," Science 220: 671-680.
Neurocomputing, Volume 1. 1988/4/07. doi: 10.7551/mitpress/4943.003.0034.
35.
Carhart-Harris RL, Leech R, Hellyer PJ, Shanahan M, Feilding A, Tagliazucchi
E, et al. The entropic brain: a theory of conscious states informed by neuroimaging
research with psychedelic drugs. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 2014;8:22. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2014.00020. PubMed PMID: WOS:000330638800001.
36.
Atasoy S, Roseman L, Kaelen M, Kringelbach ML, Deco G, Carhart-Harris RL.
Connectome-harmonic decomposition of human brain activity reveals dynamical
repertoire re-organization under LSD. Sci Rep. 2017;7:18. doi: 10.1038/s41598-01717546-0. PubMed PMID: WOS:000418250800046.
37.
Carhart-Harris RL, Erritzoe D, Williams T, Stone JM, Reed LJ, Colasanti A, et
al. Neural correlates of the psychedelic state as determined by fMRI studies with
psilocybin. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2012;109(6):2138-43. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1119598109. PubMed PMID:
WOS:000299925000068.
38.
Carhart-Harris RL, Muthukumaraswamy S, Roseman L, Kaelen M, Droog W,
Murphy K, et al. Neural correlates of the LSD experience revealed by multimodal
neuroimaging. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2016. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1518377113.
39.
Muthukumaraswamy SD, Carhart-Harris RL, Moran RJ, Brookes MJ, Williams
TM, Errtizoe D, et al. Broadband Cortical Desynchronization Underlies the Human
Psychedelic State. Journal of Neuroscience. 2013;33(38):15171-83. doi:
10.1523/jneurosci.2063-13.2013. PubMed PMID: WOS:000324586500023.
40.
Roseman L, Leech R, Feilding A, Nutt DJ, Carhart-Harris RL. The eﬀects of
psilocybin and MDMA on between-network resting state functional connectivity in
healthy volunteers. Frontiers in human neuroscience. 2014;8:204. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2014.00204. PubMed PMID: MEDLINE:24904346.
41.
Singleton SP, Luppi AI, Carhart-Harris RL, Cruzat J, Roseman L, Nutt DJ, et
al. Receptor-informed network control theory links LSD and psilocybin to a ﬂattening
of the brain's control energy landscape. Nat Commun. 2022;13(1):5812. Epub
20221003. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-33578-1. PubMed PMID: 36192411; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMCPMC9530221.

42.
Tagliazucchi E, Carhart-Harris R, Leech R, Nutt D, Chialvo DR. Enhanced
Repertoire of Brain Dynamical States During the Psychedelic Experience. Human
Brain Mapping. 2014. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22562.
43.
Gallimore AR, Luke DP. DMT research from 1956 to the edge of time. In: King
D, Luke D, Sessa B, Adams C, Tollan A, editors. Neurotransmissions – An Anthology
of Essays on Psychedelics from Breaking Convention. 1st ed: Strange Attractor Press;
2015.
44.
Lawrence DW, Carhart-Harris R, Griﬃths R, Timmermann C, Lawrence DW,
Carhart-Harris R, et al. Phenomenology and content of the inhaled N, Ndimethyltryptamine (N, N-DMT) experience. Scientiﬁc Reports 2022 12:1. 2022-0524;12(1). doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-11999-8.
45.
Michael P, Luke D, Robinson O. An Encounter With the Other: A Thematic
and Content Analysis of DMT Experiences From a Naturalistic Field Study. Frontiers
in Psychology. 2021;12. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.720717.
46.
Carhart-Harris R, Nutt D. Was it a vision or a waking dream? Frontiers in
Psychology. 2014;5. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00255.
47.
Barrett JL. Exploring the natural foundations of religion. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences. 2000/01/01;4(1). doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(99)01419-9.
48.
Dunbar RI. The social brain hypothesis and its implications for social evolution
- PubMed. Annals of human biology. 2009;36(5). doi: 10.1080/03014460902960289.
49.
Carhart-Harris RL, Friston KJ. REBUS and the Anarchic Brain: Toward a
Uniﬁed Model of the Brain Action of Psychedelics - PubMed. Pharmacological reviews.
2019;71(3). doi: 10.1124/pr.118.017160.
50.
Timmermann C, Roseman L, Schartner M, Milliere R, Williams LTJ, Erritzoe
D, et al. Neural correlates of the DMT experience assessed with multivariate EEG. Sci
Rep. 2019;9(1):16324. Epub 20191119. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-51974-4. PubMed
PMID: 31745107; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC6864083.
51.
Alamia A, Timmermann C, Nutt DJ, VanRullen R, Carhart-Harris RL. DMT
alters cortical travelling waves. eLife. 2020;9. Epub 20201012. doi: 10.7554/eLife.59784.
PubMed PMID: 33043883; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC7577737.
52.
Sterzer P, Adams RA, Fletcher P, Frith C, Lawrie SM, Muckli L, et al. The
Predictive Coding Account of Psychosis. Biological Psychiatry. 2018/11/01;84(9). doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2018.05.015.
53.
Allen P, Larøi F, McGuire PK, Aleman A. The hallucinating brain: A review of
structural and functional neuroimaging studies of hallucinations. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews. 2008/01/01;32(1). doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2007.07.012.
54.
Miyauchi S, Misaki M, Kan S, Fukunaga T, Koike T, Miyauchi S, et al. Human
brain activity time-locked to rapid eye movements during REM sleep. Experimental
Brain Research 2008 192:4. 2008-10-02;192(4). doi: 10.1007/s00221-008-1579-2.

55.
Lefebvre S, Demeulemeester M, Leroy A, Delmaire C, Lopes R, Pins D, et al.
Network dynamics during the diﬀerent stages of hallucinations in schizophrenia PubMed. Human brain mapping. 2016;37(7). doi: 10.1002/hbm.23197.
56.
A R. The reinterpretation of dreams: an evolutionary hypothesis of the function
of dreaming. The Behavioral and brain sciences. 2000 Dec;23(6). doi:
10.1017/s0140525x00004015.
57.
Valli K, Revonsuo A, Pälkäs O, Ismail K, Ali K, Punamäki R. The threat
simulation theory of the evolutionary function of dreaming: Evidence from dreams of
traumatized children. Consciousness and cognition. 2005 Mar;14(1). doi:
10.1016/S1053-8100(03)00019-9.
58.
Schredl M, Hofmann F. Continuity between waking activities and dream
activities. Consciousness and Cognition. 2003;12(2):298-308. doi: 10.1016/s10538100(02)00072-7. PubMed PMID: WOS:000183227200009.
59.
Tuominen J, Stenberg T, Revonsuo A, Valli K. Social contents in dreams: An
empirical test of the Social Simulation Theory. Consciousness and Cognition.
2019/03/01;69. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2019.01.017.
60.
Goodwin DW, Rosenthal R. Clinical Signiﬁcance of Hallucinations in
Psychiatric Disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1971/01/01;24(1). doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.1971.01750070078011.
61.
van Ommen MM, van Laar T, Renken R, Cornelissen FW, Bruggeman R.
Visual Hallucinations in Psychosis: The Curious Absence of the Primary Visual
Cortex. Schizophrenia Bulletin. 2023/02/24;49(Supplement_1). doi:
10.1093/schbul/sbac140.
62.
Foulkes D. Children's Dreaming and the Development of Consciousness:
Harvard University Press; 1999.
63.
Foulkes D, Larson JD, Swanson EM, Rardin M. TWO STUDIES OF
CHILDHOOD DREAMING. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry. 1969/07/01;39(4).
doi: 10.1111/j.1939-0025.1969.tb02457.x.
64.
Alan K Davis JMC, Eric G Weaver,Ethan S Hurwitz,Matthew W
Johnson,Roland R Griﬃths. Survey of entity encounter experiences occasioned by
inhaled N,N-dimethyltryptamine: Phenomenology, interpretation, and enduring eﬀects.
Journal of Psychopharmacology. 2020;34(9). doi: 10.1177/0269881120916143.
65.
Singleton SP, Timmermann C, Luppi AI, Eckernäs E, Roseman L, CarhartHarris RL, et al. Network control energy reductions under DMT relate to serotonin
receptors, signal diversity, and subjective experience. Commun Biol. 2025;8(1):631.
Epub 20250418. doi: 10.1038/s42003-025-08078-9. PubMed PMID: 40251353; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMCPMC12008288.
66.
Myconub. 8th Dimensional Hell/Hyperslap Experience from 20mg Dabbed.
Reddit; 2018.
67.
Consplice. DMT & Lorazepam-Smiling at Hell. Reddit; 2017.

68.
Gomez-Emilsson A. DMT Entities Decoded by Coupled Oscillators 2025.
Available from: https://youtu.be/gi08eVU_-f8?si=OthjzLRzF9zy7QYa.
69.
Gómez-Emilsson A. The Hyperbolic Geometry of DMT Experiences:
Symmetries, Sheets, and Saddled Scenes 2016. Available from:
https://www.qri.org/blog/hyperbolic-geometry-DMT.
70.
Gómez-Emilsson A. Algorithmic Reduction of Psychedelic States. Qualia
Computing, 20 June 2016 2016. Available from:
https://qualiacomputing.com/2016/06/20/algorithmic-reduction-of-psychedelic-states/.
71.
Gomez-Emilsson A. The Theory of Neural Annealing. Presentation at The Stoa,
7 June 2021 2021. Available from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ndjbeF4EqRs.
72.
Otherworldly Bewilderness: An Experience with DMT (exp1851) [Internet].
2000. Available from: erowid.org/exp/1851.
73.
Arkani-Hamed N, Bai Y, Lam T, Arkani-Hamed N, Bai Y, Lam T. Positive
geometries and canonical forms. Journal of High Energy Physics 2017 2017:11. 201711-08;2017(11). doi: 10.1007/JHEP11(2017)039.
74.
Gonthier G. Formal Proof—The Four- Color Theorem. Notices of the AMS.
2008;55(11):1382-93.
75.
Gallimore AR. Death by Astonishment: Confronting the Mystery of the World’s
Strangest Drug. 1st ed. New York: St. Martin’s Press; 2025.
76.
Gallimore AR, Strassman RJ. A Model for the Application of Target-Controlled
Intravenous Infusion for a Prolonged Immersive DMT Psychedelic Experience.
Frontiers in Pharmacology. 2016;7:11. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2016.00211. PubMed PMID:
WOS:000379571400002.
77.
Luan LX, Eckernäs E, Ashton M, Rosas FE, Uthaug MV, Bartha A, et al.
Psychological and physiological eﬀects of extended DMT. Journal of
Psychopharmacology. 2024-1;38(1). doi: 10.1177/02698811231196877.
78.
Erne L, Vogt SB, Müller L, Nuraj A, Becker A, Klaiber A, et al. Acute dosedependent eﬀects and self-guided titration of continuous N,N-dimethyltryptamine
infusions in a double-blind placebo-controlled study in healthy participants.
Neuropsychopharmacology 2024 50:6. 2024-12-19;50(6). doi: 10.1038/s41386-024-020418.
79.
Vogt SB, Ley L, Erne L, Straumann I, Becker AM, Klaiber A, et al. Acute
eﬀects of intravenous DMT in a randomized placebo-controlled study in healthy
participants. Translational Psychiatry 2023 13:1. 2023-05-23;13(1). doi:
10.1038/s41398-023-02477-4.
80.
Rodriguez MA. A methodology for studying various interpretations of the N,Ndimethyltryptamine-induced alternate reality. Journal of Scientiﬁc Exploration.
2007;21(1):67-84.

