Quantum State Transfer in Graphs
by

Gabriel de Morais Coutinho

A thesis
presented to the University of Waterloo
in fulfillment of the
thesis requirement for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
in
Combinatorics and Optimization

Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, 2014

c Gabriel de Morais Coutinho 2014

Author’s Declaration
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis,
including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners.
I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

ii

Abstract
Let X be a graph, A its adjacency matrix, and t ∈ R≥0 . The matrix exp(itA) determines the evolution in time of a certain quantum system defined on the graph. It represents
a continuous-time quantum walk in X. We say that X admits perfect state transfer from
a vertex u to a vertex v if there is a time τ ∈ R≥0 such that
exp(iτ A)u,v = 1.
The main problem we study in this thesis is that of determining which simple graphs
admit perfect state transfer. For some classes of graphs the problem is solved. For example,
Pn admits perfect state transfer if and only if n = 2 or n = 3. However, the general problem
of determining all graphs that admit perfect state transfer is substantially hard.
In this thesis, we focus on some special cases. We provide necessary and sufficient
conditions for a distance-regular graph to admit perfect state transfer. In particular, we
provide a detailed account of which distance-regular graphs of diameter three do so.
A graph is said to be spectrally extremal if the number of distinct eigenvalues is equal
to the diameter plus one. Distance-regular graphs are examples of such graphs. We study
perfect state transfer in spectrally extremal graphs and explore rich connections to the
topic of orthogonal polynomials. We characterize perfect state transfer in such graphs.
We also provide a general framework in which perfect state transfer in graph products
can be studied. We use this to determine when direct products and double covers of
graphs admit perfect state transfer. As a consequence, we provide many new examples
of simple graphs admitting perfect state transfer. We also provide some advances in the
understanding of perfect state transfer in Cayley graphs for Z2d and Zn .
Finally, we consider the problem of determining which trees admit perfect state transfer.
We show more generally that, except for K2 , if a connected bipartite graph contains a
unique perfect matching, then it cannot admit perfect state transfer. We also consider
this problem in the context of another model of quantum walks determined by the matrix
exp(itL), where L is the Laplacian matrix of the graph. In particular, we show that no
tree on an odd number of vertices admits perfect state transfer according to this model.
iii

Acknowledgements
I am very grateful to Chris Godsil for all his guidance and support throughout all these
years. His trust and his constant optimism regarding my research were absolutely essential
to the completion of this thesis.
I am also grateful to the C&O faculty, staff and fellow graduate students for being part
of my pleasant experience as a PhD student in Waterloo.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by the CAPES
Foundation, Ministry of Education of Brazil.

iv

Table of Contents
1 Introduction

1

1.1

Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

1.2

Overview of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

1.3

Brief literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

2 Background

13

2.1

Algebraic graph theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

2.2

Continuous-time quantum walks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

2.3

Number theory and field theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

2.4

Perfect state transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

2.5

Strong cospectrality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32

3 Distance-regular graphs and association schemes

36

3.1

Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

36

3.2

Perfect state transfer on distance-regular graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

40

3.2.1

Diameter two . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

42

3.2.2

Diameter three . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

43

3.2.3

Larger diameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

50

Perfect state transfer on association schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

52

3.3

v

4 Graph products and double-covers

58

4.1

Framework for studying state transfer in products . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

59

4.2

Direct product of graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

63

4.3

Other graph products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

68

4.4

Double-covers and switching graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

71

5 Translation graphs

74

5.1

Cubelike graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

75

5.2

Circulant graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

80

6 Orthogonal polynomials and spectrally extremal graphs

83

6.1

Orthogonal polynomials and matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

84

6.2

Distance matrices and equitable partitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

87

6.3

Spectrally extremal vertices and quantum walks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

90

6.4

State transfer on spectrally extremal graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

95

7 Bipartite graphs, trees and the Laplacian matrix

98

7.1

Bipartite graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7.2

Laplacian matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101

7.3

Continuous-time quantum walk on the Laplacian matrix . . . . . . . . . . 105

8 Future work

99

110

8.1

Symmetries of a graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110

8.2

The derivative of U (t) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114

8.3

Other properties of strongly cospectral vertices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115

8.4

Compilation of problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118

References

120
vi

Chapter 1
Introduction
This thesis is about graph-theoretic problems motivated by quantum computing theory. A
quantum bit, or a qubit, is a two-state quantum system, and as such it is the basic unit
of quantum information. Our underlying assumption is that a graph represents a network
of interacting qubits, and our main motivation is to understand how information flows in
such a network accordingly to specified rules. The key concept is that of a continuous-time
quantum walk, first introduced in 1998 by Farhi and Gutmann in [26] to develop quantum
algorithms using decision trees. We however stress that despite the quantum flavoured
motivation of our goals, this is a thesis in algebraic graph theory.
We will see that for a simple and natural choice of a time-independent Hamiltonian, the
evolution of a state of the network of qubits depends uniquely on the spectral properties
of the adjacency matrix of the underlying graph. This connection motivates the main goal
of this thesis.
(1) Determine for which graphs the overlying network of qubits admits a perfect transfer
of quantum state between two of its qubits.
The following secondary goals naturally arise from this quest.
(2) Understand the relation between classical graph properties and quantum motivated
properties.
1

(3) Examine other distinguished quantum states that depend solely on spectral information of the graph.
(4) Examine another coupling model that is related to the Laplacian matrix of the graph.
We obtained partial success in all of the aforementioned goals. In the next section, we
discuss some of the motivation to our research.

1.1

Motivation

To motivate the problem in this thesis, we introduce some definitions.
A qubit is the quantum analogue of a classical bit. Whereas a bit can take any value in
the set {0, 1}, a qubit can be assigned to any 1-dimensional subspace from a 2-dimensional
complex vector space. In this sense, we associate a qubit to such a 2-dimensional space,
and a state of such a qubit to one of the 1-dimensional subspaces. Given a graph X with
n vertices, we suppose that the vertices of the graph represent qubits, and that the edges
represent quantum wires between such qubits. The energy of the system is expressed in
terms of a Hermitian matrix H, called the Hamiltonian. We choose a time-independent
Hamiltonian, and thus the Schrödinger equation of quantum mechanics will imply that the
evolution of the system is governed by the matrix exp(−itH/~), where t is a positive time
and ~ is the Planck constant divided by 2π. We initialize our system setting a fixed qubit
to a particular state, and all other qubits to the orthogonal state. The classical analogy
would be to initialize one bit as 1, and all other bits as 0. With these settings, it turns
out that the evolution of the system will be determined by a matrix of dimension n rather
than 2n .
Let X be a simple and undirected graph. By A = A(X) we denote the symmetric
matrix whose rows and columns are indexed by the vertices of X, and we fill this matrix
with 1s whenever the corresponding vertices are adjacent, and 0 otherwise. This matrix
is known as the adjacency matrix of X. If D = D(X) is a diagonal matrix whose entries
correspond to the degrees of the vertices of X, we define the Laplacian matrix L = L(X)
by L = D − A.
2

Upon certain choices of a time-independent Hamiltonian, more specifically the XYcoupling model or the XYZ-coupling model, the quantum system defined in the graph as
above will evolve accordingly to exp(itA) or to exp(itL) respectively. The dynamics of the
quantum states in each vertex resembles in some aspects the dynamics of a random walk.
For instance, at each point in time, the squares of the absolute values of each entry of a
column of exp(itA) determine a probability distribution on the vertices of X. For that
reason, we typically say that such a matrix represents a continuous-time quantum walk on
the graph. Note however that many intrinsic properties of classical random walks are not
true for quantum walks. For example, there is no convergence to a uniform distribution;
except in empty graphs, quantum walks always have an oscillatory behaviour.
The problem we are mostly concerned about is that of determining a time τ in which
the quantum state input in a vertex is transferred with probability one to another vertex.
Naturally, this would be related to the problem of transferring information in a quantum
system with no errors. We formalize this below.
Let X be a graph on n vertices with adjacency matrix A = A(X). Using the power
series for the exponential function, we have
exp(itA) =

X (it)k
k≥0

k!

Ak .

Given two vertices u and v of X, we denote their respective characteristic vectors by
eu ∈ Rn and ev ∈ Rn . We say that X admits perfect state transfer (with respect to the
XY-coupling model) from vertex u to vertex v at a time τ ∈ R+ if there is a complex number
λ such that
exp(iτ A)eu = λev .
We say that X is periodic at u if u = v in the equation above. Analogous definitions hold
for the XYZ-coupling model, with L taking the place of A above.
Finding graphs that admit perfect state transfer with respect to these coupling models
is therefore translated into a problem that depends uniquely on the spectral properties of
the matrices A or L, and thus a problem in classical algebraic graph theory. This problem
was first proposed by Christandl et al. in [19] and [20], and since then, it has received a
3

considerable amount of attention from the physics and mathematics communities. In the
last section of this chapter, we will review some of the work that has been done in the area.
The applicability of our findings faces major challenges, for instance, whether or nor a
quantum computer will ever be built. For that reason, it is fair to say that our main motivation to work on this problem has a strong intrinsic aspect, influenced by our curiosity to
understand how the spectral properties of graph correlate to other graph properties. More
specifically, we will see that the questions raised by our investigation on the relationship
between the spectral properties of a graph and quantum walks are new and interesting. We
believe that these are questions that by themselves deserve attention, but we will try to
keep in the back of our mind the potential applicability of our results in quantum computing. After all, mathematics is often motivated by goals even more abstract than ours, and
yet there are countless examples of mathematical theories that find practical applications
decades or even centuries after their development.
The following section contains an overview of our main results.

1.2

Overview of results

Let X be a simple undirected graph on n vertices and let A = A(X) be its adjacency
matrix. Suppose the set of distinct eigenvalues of A is equal to {θ0 , ..., θd }. The matrix A
is symmetric, and therefore there exists an orthogonal basis of Rn consisting of eigenvectors
of A. As a consequence, A admits a spectral decomposition into orthogonal projections
given by
d
X
A=
θr Er .
r=0

A very important feature of this decomposition is that it allows for power series evaluated
in A to be expressed as linear combinations of the projection matrices. More specifically,
we have that
d
X
exp(itA) =
eitθr Er .
r=0

4

Because the projection matrices are orthogonal, that is, if r 6= s then Er Es = O, it follows
that exp(itA)eu = λev if and only if, for all r ∈ {0, ..., d}, we have
eitθr Er eu = λEr ev .
As a consequence, for all r, the real vectors Er eu and Er ev must satisfy
Er eu = ±Er ev .

(1.1)

Vertices u and v satisfying the condition above are called strongly cospectral. The existence
of strongly cospectral vertices imposes significant restrictions on the structure of graphs
that might admit perfect state transfer. The following graph is an example of a graph
that contains pairs of strongly cospectral vertices. It is the skeleton of the 4-dimensional
hypercube. The black vertices are those at even distance from u, and the white vertices
are those at odd distance from u.

u

v
This graph satisfies the following three important properties.
(1) The number of edges from a vertex at distance i from u to the set of all vertices at
distance j from u depends only on i and j. For example, all vertices at distance two
from u have precisely two neighbours at distance three from u.
5

(2) Property (1) is valid if we replace u for any vertex w of the graph. Moreover, the
number of edges from a vertex at distance i from w to the set of all vertices at distance
j from w does not depend on the choice of w.
(3) For each vertex w of the graph, there is a unique vertex at maximum distance from w.
For example, v is the unique vertex at distance four from u.
A partition of the vertex set of a graph according to the distance from a fixed vertex u
is called the distance partition of u. If a distance partition satisfies property (1), it is called
an equitable distance partition. The numbers of edges between the cells of the partition
are known as the parameters of the partition.
Graphs satisfying properties (1) and (2) are called distance-regular. If a distanceregular graph satisfies property (3), then it is called an antipodal distance-regular graph
with fibres of size two. When these graphs have diameter three, they correspond to rich
combinatorial structures known as regular two-graphs.
The first more specific question that we addressed was to determine which distanceregular graphs admit perfect state transfer. We devote Chapter 3 to this topic. The most
important result in this chapter is the following, which we use to completely determine
which of the known distance-regular graphs admit perfect state transfer.
3.2.3 Theorem. Suppose X is a distance-regular graph with distinct eigenvalues θ0 > ... >
θd . Then X admits perfect state transfer between vertices u and v if and only the following
holds.
(i) The eigenvalues of X are integers.
(ii) X is antipodal with fibres of size two, and u and v are antipodal vertices.
(iii) For all odd r, the power of two in the factorization of θ0 − θr is a constant, say α.
(iv) For all even r, the power of two in the factorization of θ0 − θr is larger than α.
As an application of the theorem above, we are able to completely characterize perfect
state transfer in graphs corresponding to regular two-graphs (see Theorems 3.2.13 and
3.2.14, and Table 3.1).
6

An association scheme consists of a set of 01-matrices satisfying certain combinatorial properties that resemble the regularity properties observed in distance-regular graphs.
The algebra spanned by these 01-matrices is called the Bose-Mesner algebra of the association scheme. We observed that the techniques we used to study perfect state transfer in
distance-regular graphs could be applied to graphs whose adjacency matrix belongs to the
Bose-Mesner algebra of an association scheme.
Let X and Y be graphs with adjacency matrices A(X) and A(Y ). The direct product of X and Y , denoted by X × Y , is the graph defined by the adjacency matrix
A(X × Y ) = A(X) ⊗ A(Y ). Observe the example below.

If X is a distance-regular graph, its direct product with K2 is a graph whose adjacency
matrix belongs to the Bose-Mesner algebra of an association scheme. Using this fact, we
are able to find many new examples of perfect state transfer in simple graphs through the
use of the following theorem.
3.3.4 Theorem. Let V (K2 ) = {v1 , v2 }. Suppose X is distance-regular on n vertices with
eigenvalues θ0 > ... > θd , and let θr = 2fr `r , where `r is an odd integer. For any vertex
u ∈ V (X), the direct product X × K2 admits perfect state transfer between (u, v1 ) and
(u, v2 ) if and only if both conditions below hold.
(i) For all r, we have fr = a for some constant a.
(ii) For all r and s, we have `r ≡ `s mod 4.
We define below two other graph products which are objects of our study.
Let X and Y be graphs with adjacency matrices A(X) and A(Y ). The Cartesian
product of X and Y , denoted by XY , is the graph defined by the adjacency matrix
A(XY ) = A(X) ⊗ I + I ⊗ A(Y ). Observe the example below.
7

The n-th Cartesian power of X will be denoted by X n .
If X and Y are graphs constructed on the same vertex set with n vertices, we define
X n Y as the graph with adjacency matrix
!
A(X) A(Y )
A(X n Y ) =
.
A(Y ) A(X)
If X and Y do not contain a common edge, then A(X) + A(Y ) defines a graph. The graph
X n Y is double cover of the graph with adjacency matrix A(X) + A(Y ). If X denotes
the complement of X, then X n X is a double cover of the complete graph on n vertices
known as the switching graph of X.

switching graph

Antipodal distance-regular graphs of diameter three and fibres of size two defined on
n vertices are double covers of the complete graph Kn . Double covers and direct products
with K2 can both be studied within a much more general framework. We introduce this
approach in Chapter 4, and we study perfect state transfer in this context. As a consequence, we are able to provide necessary and sufficient conditions for certain graph products
to admit perfect state transfer, including double covers of the complete graph. The main
contribution of this chapter comprises many new examples of perfect state transfer, which
we find using the following two corollaries.
4.2.6 Corollary. Suppose X and Y graphs. If Y admits perfect state transfer, if the
eigenvalues of X and Y are integers or integer multiples of a square root, and if the powers
8

of two in the factorization of the integer parts of the eigenvalues of X are all the same,
then there exists a k0 ∈ Z+ such that X ⊗ Y (mk0 ) admits perfect state transfer for all
m ≥ 1.
4.4.4 Corollary. Suppose X and Y are graphs on the same vertex set, and let u be a
vertex of these graphs. Suppose A(X) and A(Y ) commute. Then perfect state transfer
happens in X n Y between the two copies of u if and only if there is a time τ such that X
is periodic at u at time τ , and Y is periodic at u at time τ and with phase ±i.
We call a graph spectrally extremal if the number of distinct eigenvalues is equal to
the diameter plus one. Given a vertex u of a graph X, its eccentricity is the maximum
distance from u to any vertex of X. The eigenvalue support of u is the set of eigenvalues
such that the projection of eu onto the corresponding eigenspace is non-zero. A vertex is
spectrally extremal if the size of its eigenvalue support is equal to its eccentricity plus one.
It turns out that spectral extremality is a concept with very interesting connections to
the topics of equitable partitions and orthogonal polynomials. In the context of quantum
walks, one of our most important results is an example of such relations. We say that u
and v are (a pair of) antipodal vertices if the distance partition of u is equitable, {v} is a
singleton in the partition at maximum distance from u, and the parameters of the partition
are symmetric with respect to u and v.
6.3.3 Theorem. Suppose X is regular and 2-connected. Then u and v are antipodal
vertices in X if and only if u and v are spectrally extremal and strongly cospectral to each
other.
We also study perfect state transfer in spectrally extremal graphs, and we find a generalization of our result for distance-regular graphs.
6.4.2 Corollary. Suppose X is a spectrally extremal regular graph of diameter d on n
vertices, having distinct eigenvalues θ0 > ... > θd . Then X admits perfect state transfer
between any two vertices u and v at distance d if and only if
(i) All eigenvalues are integers.
9

(ii) For all odd r, the power of 2 in the factorization of θ0 − θr is a constant, say α.
(iii) For all even r, the power of 2 in the factorization of θ0 − θr is larger than α.
(iv) The following equality holds
n

d
Y 1
X
1
=
(−1)r
.
θ
−
θ
θ
−
θ
0
s
r
s
r=0
s=0
s6=r

d
Y

The last major problem we address in the thesis is that of determining which trees
admit perfect state transfer. We will examine this problem with respect to the adjacency
matrix and with respect to the Laplacian matrix. In the former case, we note that our
observations are easily generalized to bipartite graphs in general. Our strongest result is
the following.
7.1.4 Theorem. Except for K2 , no connected bipartite graph with a unique perfect matching admits perfect state transfer.
In the quantum model associated to the Laplacian matrix, we apply the Matrix-Tree
Theorem to show the following result, which in particular shows that no tree on an odd
number of vertices admits perfect state transfer in this model.
7.3.6 Theorem. If X is a graph on an odd number of vertices with an odd number of
spanning trees, then perfect state transfer with respect to the Laplacian cannot happen.
The results above indicate that perfect state transfer is a rare phenomenon in trees,
perhaps happening only on P2 and P3 .

1.3

Brief literature review

A continuous-time quantum walk matrix was first considered by Farhi and Gutmann [26]
in 1998, but in a context different than ours. Bose [11] in 2003 proposed a scheme for using
spin chains to achieve the task of transmitting a quantum state. In [19], 2004, Christandl,
10

Datta, Ekert and Landahl defined the problem of finding perfect state transfer in quantum
spin networks with respect to the nearest-neighbour XY-coupling model. Since then, the
topic has received a considerable amount of attention from the physics and mathematics
communities. We summarize in the list below some of the major achievements in the
problem of determining which undirected graphs admit perfect state transfer in the XY−
or the XYZ-coupling models. Only for the list below, we will use PST to refer to perfect
state transfer.
1) Christandl et al. [20]. Extends the work done in [19] by Christandl et al. They showed
that if PST happens in graphs admitting mirror-symmetry, the ratio of certain differences of eigenvalues must be rational. They used this fact to show that PST does not
happen in paths Pn for n ≥ 4. To achieve PST at larger distances, they showed that if
a graph admits PST, any iterated Cartesian power of itself also admits PST, and thus
they examine powers of P2 and P3 . They used that to show that weighted paths of
arbitrary length may admit PST.
2) Kay [52] worked on the problem of transfer of state using other coupling models. In
[51], he showed that if PST happens in a simple graph between two vertices, neither
can be involved in PST with a third vertex.
3) Godsil [34] explored different aspects of state transfer. For instance, he showed that
eigenvalues in the eigenvalue support of vertices involved in PST must be quadratic
integers. He also considered the relation between PST and concepts such as controllable
vertices, cospectral vertices and equitable partitions.
4) A Cayley graph on the group Z2d is called a cubelike graph. Bernasconi et al. [9]
showed that if a cubelike graph is defined in terms of a connection set whose sum is not
0, then such graphs admit PST at time π2 . Cheung and Godsil [18] subsequently studied
cubelike graphs whose connection set sum is 0. In that case, PST might or might not
happen, and they provided necessary and sufficient conditions for PST that are stated
in terms of a linear code associated to the graph. If PST happens in this case, it must
be at a time < π2 .

11

5) A Cayley graph on the group Zn is called a circulant graph. Saxena et al. [63] showed
that any circulant graph admitting perfect state transfer must have integral eigenvalues
(their argument was later extended to any regular graph). In a sequence of three papers,
Bašić et al. ([7], [62] and [8]) provided necessary and sufficient conditions for circulant
graphs to admit PST.
6) Some constructions using joins and products were studied by Tamon and other authors.
Angeles-Canul et al. [3] showed that certain joins of regular graphs with K2 or its
complement admit PST. The same set of authors also studied weighted joins of graphs in
[4]. Ge et al. [31] analysed some graph products and weighted joins. Finally, Bachman et
al. [5] considered some asymmetric graphs admitting PST whose quotient is a weighted
path.
7) Godsil [33] showed that if a graph whose adjacency matrix belongs to the Bose-Mesner
algebra of an association scheme admits PST, then one of the classes of the scheme is
a permutation matrix of order 2. He also studied walk-regular graphs in the context
of state transfer. Coutinho et al. [21] extended that necessary condition to a set of
sufficient conditions for graphs belonging to such algebras to admit PST, finding more
examples of PST in simple graphs.
8) PST on distance-regular graphs had been previously considered by Jafarizadeh and
Sufiani [48]. Together with other authors, they considered the problem of engineering
the Hamiltonian to obtain PST on locally distance-regular graphs and group schemes
(respectively [49] and [50]).
9) Vinet and Zhedanov ([67] and [66]) worked out some examples of PST on weighted
paths based on the theory of orthogonal polynomials.
10) Some valuable surveys have been published in the past years. Kendon and Tamon [55]
surveyed results about PST in join constructions, weighted paths and circulant graphs.
They also discussed discrete-time quantum walks. Kay [53] reviewed the topic of PST,
and proceeded to show how it can be used to achieve some features related to quantum
computation. Godsil [39] reviewed some results on PST focusing on the algebraic graph
theory behind the properties of exp(itA).
12

Chapter 2
Background
The purpose of this chapter is to provide sufficient background for all other chapters of this
thesis. We will first introduce most of the graph-theoretic definitions and notation that
we will use later on in this thesis. We will also state basic important theorems of linear
algebra and algebraic graph theory. This section can be skipped by any reader familiar
with the topic, and most, if not all of the material can be found in Godsil and Royle
[42] and Brouwer and Haemers [14]. We will assume the reader is familiar with standard
definitions related to graph theory. For that, our main reference is Bondy and Murty [10].
Following this, we will build the basic connection between continuous-time quantum
walks and algebraic graph theory. Our main source for this section is Christandl et al. [20].
We will not aim to provide a self-contained introduction to quantum mechanics or quantum
computing theory. For the former we suggest Hall [45], and for the latter we recommend
Kaye et al. [54]. Section 2.3 contains a very short summary of the results from number
theory and field theory that we will use throughout this thesis.
The final sections are dedicated to introducing the basic results about the main topic
of this thesis. We will try our best to be self-contained, including all background material
needed for future chapters. In this chapter, there are essentially no new results, but some
ideas will be presented in a new and more useful form, and new proofs of some results are
also included.

13

2.1

Algebraic graph theory

Here and throughout all of this thesis, unless otherwise explicitly stated, we will use the
word “graph” to mean a finite, simple and undirected graph. The letters X and Y will
always be used to represent graphs, and V (X) and E(X) will be respectively the vertex
and edge set of X. We will reserve u, v, w, a and b for the vertices of our graphs, and our
edges will always be represented as a pair of vertices. The adjacency matrix of a graph is
the symmetric 01-matrix whose rows and columns are indexed by the vertices of the graph
and whose entries are defined as follows
(
1 if uv ∈ E(X),
A(X)u,v =
0 otherwise.
We stress here the chosen order of the vertices to index the rows and columns is not relevant,
as long as we are consistent with it. Moreover, we have the following interpretation of the
isomorphisms of a graph.
2.1.1 Lemma. Graphs X and Y are isomorphic if and only if there is a permutation
matrix P such that P T A(X)P = A(Y ).
When the context is clear, we shall denote A = A(X). The powers of A provide
information about the walks of X.
2.1.2 Lemma. If k ∈ N, then (Ak )uv is equal to the number of walks of length k whose
end vertices are u and v.
2.1.3 Corollary. If m = |E(X)|, then tr A = 0 and tr A2 = 2m.
Throughout this thesis, we will usually denote the characteristic polynomial of A(X)
by φX (t). The eigenvalues of A(X) will be referred to as the eigenvalues or the spectrum
of the graph X. We will usually denote the distinct eigenvalues of X by θ0 , θ1 etc.
The identity matrix of convenient order will be denoted by I, the zero matrix by O,
and the all 1s matrix by J. The all 1s vector will be denoted by j, the zero vector by 0,
and usually our vectors will receive bold letters. Given an ordering of the vertex set of X,
14

usually that of the rows of A(X), a vector of a standard basis corresponding to u ∈ V (X)
will be denoted by eu . For example, if X denotes the complement of X, note that
A(X) = J − I − A(X).
The following theorem is one of the most important results of basic linear algebra.
2.1.4 Theorem. A complex matrix M of order n is Hermitian if and only if there exists
a basis of Cn consisting of orthonormal eigenvectors of M . Moreover, if M is Hermitian,
all of its eigenvalues are real.
A matrix E is called idempotent if E 2 = E. The following corollary will be referred to
as the spectral decomposition a Hermitian matrix.
2.1.5 Corollary. If {θ0 , ..., θd } are the distinct eigenvalues of a Hermitian matrix M , then
M can be written as
d
X
M=
θr Er
r=0

where the matrices E0 ,...,Ed satisfy
(1) Er is an idempotent,
(2) Er Es = O if r 6= s,
(3)

d
X

Er = I.

r=0

Each of these matrices corresponds to an orthogonal projection onto the corresponding
eigenspace.
The matrices Er can be uniquely determined from the eigenvectors of M . If {v1 , ..., vk }
k
X
is an orthonormal basis for the eigenspace associated to θr , then Er =
vi v i ∗ .
i=1

If we are referring to an eigenvalue θ of a matrix M without the use of indices, we will
use Eθ to denote the corresponding orthogonal projection. A very important feature of the
decomposition above is the following theorem.
15

2.1.6 Theorem. Suppose f is a univariate function and M is a Hermitian matrix with
P
spectral decomposition M = dr=0 θr Er . If the Taylor series of f converges to f on the
spectrum of M , then f (M ) is well defined in terms of the Taylor series of f , and moreover
f (M ) =

d
X

f (θr )Er .

r=0

2.1.7 Corollary. If M has spectral decomposition M =

Pd

r=0 θr Er , then

h{M k }k≥0 i = hEr idr=0 .
Proof. From Theorem 2.1.6, the powers of M can be written in terms of the Er . But also
if p(x) is a polynomial such that p(θr ) = 1 and p(θs ) = 0 for all s 6= r, then p(M ) = Er , so
the equality holds.
The following theorem is a typical exercise in linear algebra textbooks, but will be very
useful to us.
2.1.8 Theorem. Symmetric matrices M1 , ..., Mk of order n pairwise commute if and only
if there exists one basis of Rn consisting of orthogonal eigenvectors for all of the matrices.
The following result is usually referred to as the Perron-Frobenius Theorem. It can be
presented in a more general framework, but here we will restrict to our needs.
2.1.9 Theorem. Suppose X is a connected graph, and A = A(X). Let θ0 be the largest
eigenvalue of A. Then the following properties hold.
(1) The multiplicity of θ0 is equal to one.
(2) There exists a strictly positive vector v such that Av = θ0 v.
(3) Any non-negative eigenvector of A belongs to the eigenspace of θ0 .
(4) If Y is a subgraph of X and σ is an eigenvalue of Y , then |σ| ≤ θ0 . Equality holds if
and only if Y = X.
16

The largest eigenvalue of the graph will be referred to as the Perron eigenvalue, and
the unique (up to scalar) positive eigenvector in its eigenspace will be called the Perron
eigenvector.
2.1.10 Corollary. A connected graph X is k-regular if and only if its Perron eigenvector
is j. In that case, the Perron eigenvalue is k.
2.1.11 Corollary. If X is a k-regular graph on n vertices, then A(X) and A(X) commute. Hence they can be simultaneously diagonalized, and if {k, θ1 , ..., θd } are the distinct
eigenvalues of X, the distinct eigenvalues of X are {(n − 1 − k), (−1 − θ1 ), ..., (−1 − θd )}.
For bipartite graphs, we have the following spectral characterization.
2.1.12 Theorem. A connected graph X is bipartite if and only if −θ0 is an eigenvalue. In
that case, for all eigenvalues θ of X, −θ is also an eigenvalue. Moreover, if (v1 , v2 ) is an
eigenvector for θ partitioned according to the classes of X, then (v1 , −v2 ) is an eigenvector
for −θ.
Finally, we present a theorem usually referred to as interlacing. If M is a symmetric
matrix of order n, we denote by θ1 (M ) ≥ θ2 (M ) ≥ ... ≥ θn (M ) the eigenvalues of M .
2.1.13 Theorem. If A is a symmetric matrix of order n, and B is a principal submatrix
of A of order m, then, for i = 1, ..., m,
θn−m+i (A) ≤ θi (B) ≤ θi (A).
The obvious interpretation of the theorem above is that the eigenvalues of any induced
subgraph of X interlace those of X.

2.2

Continuous-time quantum walks

In this section we address the problem of creating a quantum channel to transmit a quantum
state from one location to another. To achieve that, we consider the quantum spin system
17

model, where qubits are placed in a network whose dynamics is governed by a chosen
Hamiltonian. Communication between qubits can be controlled in different ways, but here
we will require a system with no external control. More specifically, after the network is
manufactured, the evolution of the system depends uniquely on the initial state and on the
structure of the network. Our goal is then to construct networks whose structure forces a
perfect state transfer, that is, a transfer of state with probability 1. The main sources for
this section are Christandl et al., [19] and [20]. This thesis is independent of this section,
so it can be skipped without prejudice.
At this point, to maintain the consistency with the other parts of this text, we make
the hard choice of avoiding the Dirac bra-ket notation.
Let X be a graph on n vertices, and to each vertex u ∈ V (X) we assign a qubit, that
is, a two-dimensional complex vector space Hu ≃ C2 . So the graph is associated to a space
n
isomorphic to C2 . We will denote the standard basis vectors of C2 by f0 and f1 . For any
S ⊂ V (X), we denote
(
O
i(u) = 1 if u ∈ S,
wS =
fi(u) , where
i(u) = 0 otherwise.
u∈V (X)
Consider the Pauli matrices
!
0 1
x
σ =
,
1 0

y

σ =

0 −i
i 0

!
,

z

σ =

1 0
0 −1

!
.

For a given ordering of the rows of A(X), and u ∈ V (X), we define
σux = I2 ⊗ · · · ⊗ I2 ⊗ σ x ⊗ I2 ⊗ · · · ⊗ I2 ,
uth position

where the product contains n multiplicands. We also consider analogous definitions for σ y
and σ z .

18

We introduce two possible choices for a time-independent Hamiltonian.
Hxy =
Hxyz =

1
2
1
2

X


Juv σux σvx + σuy σvy ,

and

(2.1)

uv∈E(X)

X


Juv σux σvx + σuy σvy + σuz σvz − I2n .

(2.2)

uv∈E(X)

We choose the first and suppose Juv = 1 for all uv ∈ E(X), and denote H = Hxy . The
Schrödinger Equation implies that if φ0 is the initial state of the system, then the state φ
at time t will be
φ(t) = e−itH/~ φ0

(2.3)

h
where ~ = 2π
, and h is the Planck constant.

For S, T ⊂ V (X), let S ⊕ T denote the symmetric difference of S and T . For any
S ⊂ V (X) and uv ∈ E(X), we observe that
(

wS⊕{u,v} if |S ∩ {u, v}| = 1,
1 x x
σu σv + σuy σvy wS =
(2.4)
2
0
otherwise.
Thus
HwS =

X

wT .

(2.5)

T ⊂V (X)
|T |=|S|
S⊕T ∈E(X)

Restricting to the case where S = {u} for some u ∈ V (X), and denoting w{v} = wv for all
v ∈ V (X), we have
X
Hwu =
wv .
(2.6)
uv∈E(X)
n

Hence the action of H on the subspace of C2 spanned by {wu }u∈V (X) is equivalent to the
action of A on Cn .
Now recall that we are motivated by the problem of transferring a quantum state from
one qubit to another. By Equation 2.3, we say that the quantum system defined on X
19

admits perfect state transfer from vertex u to vertex v with respect to the XY-coupling
model if, for some τ ∈ R+ and λ ∈ C, we have
e−iτ H/~ wu = λwv .

(2.7)

Note that for the sake of studying perfect state transfer, we can conjugate on both
sides and hence the sign on the exponent is irrelevant. We will also omit the constant ~,
supposing it is absorbed by τ . Thus, by Equation 2.6, the quantum system on X admits
perfect state transfer from u to v if and only if, for some τ ∈ R+ and λ ∈ C, we have
eiτ A eu = λev .
The analogy between a probability distribution on the vertex set of the graph determining quantum state transfer and a classical random walk in the graph is evident. For that
reason, we will say that the matrix eitA represents a model of a continuous-time quantum
walk in X.
Let D = D(X) be the diagonal matrix whose entries are the degrees of the corresponding vertices of X. The Laplacian matrix L = L(X) is defined by L = D − A. By choosing
the Hamiltonian H = Hxyz from Equation 2.2, state transfer would be equivalent to
eiτ L eu = λev .

(2.8)

Most of this thesis is concerned with the Hamiltonian Hxy . We will address the Laplacian matrix case in Chapter 7.

2.3

Number theory and field theory

This short section contains a compilation of the definitions and results related to number
theory and field theory that we will use in the thesis. Our main sources are Hardy and
Wright [47] and Cox [22].
Definition. A real number µ is an algebraic number if it is the root of a polynomial p(x)
with integer coefficients, and it is an algebraic integer if that polynomial is monic.
20

Let Q[x1 , ..., xn ] denote the ring of all finite sums of monomials on the elements {x1 , ..., xn }
with coefficients from Q. By Q(x1 , ..., xn ) we denote the field of all rational functions on
the elements {x1 , ..., xn }. It is precisely the field of fractions of Q[x1 , ..., xn ]. It follows that
Q[x1 , ..., xn−1 ][xn ] ∼
= Q[x1 , ..., xn ], and analogously for Q(·).
If n = 1 and x1 = x is algebraically independent over Q, then Q[x] is precisely the ring
of polynomials with rational coefficients. The minimal polynomial of an algebraic number
µ is the monic polynomial p(x) ∈ Q[x] of minimal degree such that p(µ) = 0. It follows
that p(x) cannot have non-trivial factors, and so it must be an irreducible polynomial. The
algebraic conjugates of an algebraic number µ are the other roots of its minimal polynomial.
First, note the relation below. If µ is an algebraic number with minimal polynomial
p(x), and if hp(x)i denotes the ideal generated by p(x), we have
Q[µ] ∼
= Q[x]/hp(x)i.
Note that Q is a field, hence Q[x] is a principal ideal domain and thus the ideal generated
by irreducible elements is maximal. The quotient of a ring by a maximal ideal is a field,
and therefore we have
Q[µ] ∼
= Q(µ).
Given a polynomial p(x) ∈ Q[x] of degree n whose set of roots over C is {µ1 , ..., µn },
this shows that Q[µ1 , ..., µn ] is a field extension of Q that contains all roots of p(x), and in
fact, it is minimal with this property. It is called the splitting field of p(x) over Q.
We will be interested in two properties of the automorphisms of a splitting field.
2.3.1 Theorem. If σ is an automorphism of any field extension of Q, and if p(x) is
a polynomial with integer coefficients, then σ fixes the set of roots of p(x) in this field
extension.
As a consequence, it follows that any automorphism of any extension of Q acts as the
identity in Q. A theorem due to Galois implies that this is actually a characterization.
2.3.2 Theorem. Let µ ∈ Q[µ1 , ..., µn ]. Then µ is fixed by all automorphisms of Q[µ1 , ..., µn ]
if and only if µ ∈ Q.
21

In this thesis, we will be concerned with the algebraic numbers which are eigenvalues of
integer matrices. Because the characteristic polynomial of a matrix is always monic with
integer coefficients, the eigenvalues of an integer matrix are always algebraic integers. For
that reason, we now move to focus on algebraic integers inside the extension field of Q.
Let Z[x] denote the ring of polynomials with integer coefficients. If µ is an algebraic
integer with minimal polynomial p(x), it follows that
Z[µ] ∼
= Z[x]/hp(x)i.
Hence for any algebraic conjugate µ0 of µ, we have
Z[µ] ∼
= Z[µ0 ].
As a consequence, we have the following proposition.
2.3.3 Proposition. Let µ be an algebraic integer, µ0 one of its conjugates, and σ be an
isomorphism Z[µ] → Z[µ0 ]. If M is an integer-valued matrix with eigenvalue µ and a
corresponding eigenvector v, it follows that µ0 is an eigenvalue of M with corresponding
eigenvector σ(v), with the understanding that σ is applied entry-wise.
Definition. An algebraic integer µ whose minimal polynomial has degree two is called a
quadratic integer .
The following characterization of quadratic integers may as well be considered folklore.
It was originally given by Dedekind in his supplements of lectures by Dirichlet (see [25]).
2.3.4 Theorem. A real number µ is a quadratic integer if and only if there are integers
a, b and ∆ such that ∆ is square-free and one of the following cases holds.
√
(i) µ = a + b ∆ and ∆ ≡ 2, 3 (mod 4).
√ 
(ii) µ = 21 a + b ∆ , ∆ ≡ 1 (mod 4), and either a and b are both even or both odd.
Proof. If (i) holds, then µ is a solution to x2 − 2ax + (a2 − b2 ∆) = 0. If (ii) holds, then µ is
a solution to x2 − ax + 14 (a2 − b2 ∆) = 0 and 41 (a2 − b2 ∆) ∈ Z. In any case, µ is a quadratic
integer.
22

Now let x2 + Ax + B = 0 be the quadratic equation satisfied by µ. Note that B 6= 0.
√
√
Let a = −A and b ∆ = A2 − 4B. From the quadratic formula, it follows that
√ 
√ 
1
a + b ∆ a − b ∆ = B ∈ Z,
4
and hence
a2 ≡ b 2 ∆

(mod 4).

√
If ∆ ≡ 2, 3 (mod 4), a and b must be even, and so µ = a0 ± b0 ∆ for some a0 , b0 ∈ Z. If
∆ ≡ 1 (mod 4), it could be the case that a2 ≡ b2 ≡ 1 (mod 4), but in this case both a
and b are odd.
We end this section introducing a notation that will be very useful throughout this
thesis.
Definition. Given a rational number ab with a and b coprime, and given a prime p, if e is
the largest integer such that pe divides a, then the p-adic norm of ab is defined as
a
= p−e .
b p
Note for example that if the power of 2 in the factorization of an integer a is larger
than the power of 2 in the factorization of an integer b, then |a|2 < |b|2 .

2.4

Perfect state transfer

Let M be a Hermitian matrix. For every non-negative real number t, we denote
UM (t) = exp(itM ) =

X (it)k
k≥0

k!

M k.

(2.9)

We will omit the subscript M whenever the context is clear. Note that U (0) = I and
U (t1 + t2 ) = U (t1 )U (t2 ). The matrix U (t) is symmetric, and U (−t) = U (t), hence U (t) is
a unitary operator:
U (t)∗ U (t) = I.
23

(2.10)

Definition. We say that the Hermitian matrix M admits perfect state transfer from a
column index u to a column index v if there exists a time τ ∈ R+ and λ ∈ C, called the
phase, such that
U (τ )eu = λev
Definition. We say that the Hermitian matrix M is periodic at a column index u if there
is a time τ ∈ R+ and phase λ ∈ C such that
U (τ )eu = λeu .
Because U (t) is unitary, in both cases we must have |λ| = 1. We will use the properties
of the proposition below without reference throughout the thesis.
2.4.1 Proposition. If M admits perfect state transfer from u to v at time τ with phase
λ, then
(i) M admits perfect state transfer from v to u at the same time with the same phase.
(ii) M is periodic at both u and v at time 2τ and with phase λ2 .
Proof. By definition, U (τ )eu = λev . Conjugating on both sides, we obtain
U (−τ )eu = λev ,
and thus, since λ =

1
,
λ

U (τ )ev = λeu .

As a consequence, we have U (τ )U (τ )eu = λU (τ )ev , and therefore
U (2τ )eu = λ2 ev .

The result above allows us to talk about perfect state transfer between indices u and
v, instead of from u to v.
24

If X is a simple graph, the adjacency matrix A = A(X) is Hermitian. Whenever we
refer to the matrix U (t) relative to X, we mean UA (t). By perfect state transfer in X
between vertices u and v, we mean perfect state transfer in A between the column indices
corresponding to u and v, and analogously for periodicity. Most of this thesis is concerned
with this case, but in Chapter 7, we will study perfect state transfer with respect to the
Laplacian matrix of X.
!
!
1
0
0
1
Example 1. If X = K2 , then note that Ak =
if k is even, and Ak =
if k
0 1
1 0
is odd. Hence
!
!
2k+1
2k
X
X
1 0
0 1
k (t)
k t
+i
(−1)
(−1)
U (t) =
(2k)! 0 1
(2k + 1)! 1 0
k≥0
k≥0
!
cos(t) i sin(t)
=
.
i sin(t) cos(t)
Setting t = π2 , then it follows that
!
!
π 1
0
U
=i
.
2
0
1
Hence K2 admits perfect state transfer between its vertices at time π2 and phase i.
The powers of an adjacency matrix are periodic if and only if the graph is a disjoint
union of copies of K2 . So for other graphs, we need a different tool to study perfect state
transfer.
Suppose that the Hermitian matrix M has distinct eigenvalues θ0 > θ1 > ... > θd . By
the Spectral Decomposition 2.1.5, we have
M=

d
X

θr Er .

r=0

By Theorem 2.1.6, it follows that
U (t) =

d
X
r=0

25

eitθr Er .

(2.11)

Example 2. Suppose X = K3 . Its eigenvalues are 2, −1 and −1, with corresponding
orthogonal idempotents




1 1 1
2 −1 −1
1
1


1 1 1 and
−1 2 −1 .
3
3
1 1 1
−1 −1 −2
Hence



 
e2it + 2e−it
1

  1
U (t) 0 =  e2it − e−it  .
3
e2it − e−it
0

, but is not involved in perfect state
So the first vertex of K3 is periodic at time t = 2π
3
transfer with any of the other vertices.
P
Definition. Given a Hermitian matrix M with spectral decomposition M = dr=0 θr Er
and a column index u of M , we say that an eigenvalue θr is in the eigenvalue support of u
if Er eu 6= 0. We will denote the eigenvalue support of u by Φu .
Example 3. The spectral decomposition of A(P3 ) is given by






√
√
1
1 0 −1
1
− 2
2 1
1
√ 1 √
√ 1 √
√ 
√ 
1 

A(P3 ) = ( 2)  2 2
2+(0) √  0 0 0 +(− 2) − 2
2
− 2
√
√
4
4
2
−1 0 1
1
2 1
1
− 2
1
√
√
The eigenvalue support of the middle vertex is equal to { 2, − 2}, whereas the eigenvalue
√
√
support of the other vertices is equal to { 2, 0, − 2}.
If M is a Hermitian matrix, u a column index of M , it follows from Equation 2.11 that
U (t)eu =

d
X

eitθr Er eu ,

r=0

and so M admits perfect state transfer between indices u and v at time τ and phase λ if
and only if
d
d
X
X
iτ θr
e Er eu = λev = λ
Er ev ,
r=0

r=0

26

where the last equality is a consequence of Corollary 2.1.5. Because the matrices Er are
orthogonal projectors, the equality above is true if and only if, for all r = 0, ..., d, we have
eiτ θr Er eu = λEr ev .

(2.12)

The numbers eiτ θr and λ are complex numbers of norm 1, and the vectors Er eu and Er ev
are real, thus Equation 2.12 implies that
Er eu = ±Er ev .

(2.13)

This equation motivates the definition below.
P
Definition. Given a Hermitian matrix M with spectral decomposition M = dr=0 θr Er
and column indices u and v of M , we say that u and v are strongly cospectral if, for all
r ∈ {0, ..., d},
Er eu = ±Er ev .
Note that a trivial consequence of strong cospectrality is that Φu = Φv .
Definition. For any pair of column indices u and v of a Hermitian matrix M , let Φ+
uv ⊂ Φu
+
−
−
be such that θ ∈ Φuv if and only if Eθ eu = Eθ ev , and let Φuv be such that θ ∈ Φuv if and
only if Eθ eu = −Eθ ev .
−
Note that u and v are strongly cospectral if and only if Φ+
uv ∪ Φuv = Φu = Φv .

Unless otherwise stated, whenever we refer to the partition defined above or the terms
eigenvalue support and strongly cospectrality in the context of a graph X and its vertices,
we mean to use these definitions with respect to the adjacency matrix A = A(X). The
next section will be dedicated to study more properties of strongly cospectral vertices.
For a connected graph X, if u and v are strongly cospectral vertices, it follows from
the Perron-Frobenius Theory 2.1.9 that the largest eigenvalue always belongs to Φ+
uv ; in
+
our convention, θ0 ∈ Φuv . Following up on the discussion above, we present a basic but
important characterization of perfect state transfer.
2.4.2 Theorem. Let X be a graph, u, v ∈ V (X). Perfect state transfer between u and v
occurs at time τ with phase λ if and only if all of the following conditions hold.
27

(a) Vertices u and v are strongly cospectral.
(b) For all θr ∈ Φ+
uv , there is a k such that τ (θ0 − θr ) = 2kπ.
(c) For all θr ∈ Φ−
uv , there is a k such that τ (θ0 − θr ) = (2k + 1)π.
Given these conditions, λ = eiτ θ0 .
Proof. From the implication Equation 2.12 =⇒ Equation 2.13, we see that (a) is a
necessary condition.
Now suppose u and v are strongly cospectral vertices. It follows from Equation 2.12
that perfect state transfer between u and v occurs if and only if there is a λ ∈ C such that
eiτ θr = ±λ for all r. Given that θ0 ∈ Φ+
uv , this is equivalent to
eiτ θ0 = eiτ θr
iτ θ0

e

iτ θr

= −e

whenever θr ∈ Φ+
uv ,

and

whenever θr ∈ Φ−
uv .

This is equivalent to, for some values of k ∈ Z depending on r,
τ (θ0 − θr ) = 2kπ whenever θr ∈ Φ+
uv ,

and

τ (θ0 − θr ) = (2k + 1)π whenever θr ∈ Φ−
uv .

(2.14)

The following theorem specifies which algebraic integers can be in the support of a
periodic vertex.
2.4.3 Theorem (Godsil [34], Theorem 6.1). Suppose M is an integer Hermitian matrix.
Then M is periodic at a column index u if and only if either of the following holds.
(i) All of the eigenvalues in Φu are integers.
(ii) All but at most one of the eigenvalues in Φu are quadratic integers, and moreover,
there is a square-free integer ∆ > 1 such that either
28

a) all the elements in Φu are integer multiples of

√

∆, or

√ 
b) there is an integer a 6= 0 such that every θr ∈ Φu is of the form 12 a + br ∆ for
integers br .

Proof. If (i) holds, take τ = 2π, and if (ii) holds, take τ = √2π∆ . In either case, τ is a time
in which M is periodic at u.
Now we show that the conditions are necessary. Suppose θ1 is an eigenvalue in the
support of u which is not an integer, so that (i) does not hold. Let {θ2 , ..., θk } be the set
of algebraic conjugates of θ1 . All these numbers are eigenvalues of X, and by Proposition
2.3.3, these eigenvalues must be in the support of u. If M is periodic at u at time τ , it
follows that eiτ θi = eiτ θj for all i, j ∈ {1, ..., k}. As a consequence, τ (θi − θj ) is always an
integer multiple of π, and thus, for all i, j ∈ {1, ..., k}, we have
θ1 − θ2
= `i,j ∈ Q.
θi − θj
Therefore
(θ1 − θ2 )k(k−1) =

Y

`i,j (θi − θj ).

i6=j

By Theorem 2.3.1, any field automorphism of Q[θ1 , ..., θk ] fixes the set {θ1 , ..., θk }, and
so fixes the right hand side of the equation above. Thus Theorem 2.3.2 implies that
(θ1 − θ2 )k(k−1) is a rational number, and because both θ1 and θ2 are algebraic integers, it
follows that (θ1 − θ2 )k(k−1) ∈ Z.
Let m be the smallest integer such that (θ1 − θ2 )m = q ∈ Z. Note that any permutation
of the set {θ1 , θ2 , ..., θk } provides a field automorphism of Q[θ1 , ..., θk ], hence if (θ1 − θ2 )
satisfies the equation xm − q = 0, so does (θi − θj ) for all i, j ∈ {1, ..., k}. However at most
two roots of xm − q are real, whereas all elements of Q[θ1 , ..., θk ] are real. This implies that
k = 2, and therefore all eigenvalues in the support of u which are not integers must be
quadratic integers.
Now suppose at least one eigenvalue θ1 in the support of u is a quadratic integer in
√
Q( ∆). Its algebraic conjugate θ2 is also in the support of u, and if no other eigenvalue is

29

there, then we are done. Let θi be an eigenvalue in the support of u. Then again we can
argue that
θ1 − θi
∈ Q.
θ1 − θ2
√
Note that (θ1 −θ2 ) is an integer multiple of ∆. It follows that θ1 −θi is an integer multiple
√
of ∆ for all θi in the eigenvalue support of u. This implies item (ii).
We will now summarize the work in this section to provide explicit necessary and
sufficient conditions for perfect state transfer, this time in the context of graphs. We note
that some of the results of the following theorem have been shown in previous works.
However, the form presented below is due to the author.
2.4.4 Theorem. Let X be a graph, u, v ∈ V (X). Let θ0 > ... > θk be the eigenvalues in
Φu . Then X admits perfect state transfer between u and v if and only if all of the following
conditions hold.
(i) Vertices u and v are strongly cospectral.
(ii) Non-zero elements in Φu are either all integers or all quadratic integers. Moreover,
there is a square-free integer ∆, an integer a, and integers b0 , ..., bk such that
θr =

√ 
1
a + br ∆ for all r = 0, ..., k.
2

Here we allow ∆ = 1 for the case where all eigenvalues are integers, and a = 0 for
√
the case where they are all multiples of ∆.

k !
θ0 − θr
√
(iii) Let g = gcd
. Then
∆ r=0
θ0 − θr
√
is even, and
g ∆
θ0 − θr
√
b) θr ∈ Φ−
is odd.
uv if and only if
g ∆

a) θr ∈ Φ+
uv if and only if

Moreover, if these conditions hold and perfect state transfer occurs between u and v at time
τ with phase λ, then
30

a) There is a minimum time τ0 > 0 at which perfect state transfer occurs between u and
v, and
1 π
τ0 = √ .
g ∆
b) The time τ is an odd multiple of τ0 .
c) The phase λ is equal to eiτ θ0 .
Proof. Theorems 2.4.2 and 2.4.3 show that conditions (i) and (ii) are necessary. We assume
they are true, and we will show that conditions 2.4.2.b and 2.4.2.c are equivalent to (iii).
π
Write τ = µ √ , where µ ∈ R+ is chosen appropriately. From (ii) above, it follows
∆
that
θ0 − θr
√
∈ Z.
∆
Conditions 2.4.2.b and 2.4.2.c imply that µ = pq , with p, q ∈ Z+ coprime and p odd. They
also imply that for all θr ∈ Φu , the number q divides
θ0 − θr
√
.
∆

(2.15)

If this happens, the conditions 2.4.2.b and 2.4.2.c are equivalent to
θ0 − θr
√
< |q|2
∆ 2
θ0 − θr
√
= |q|2
∆ 2

whenever θr ∈ Φ+
uv ,
whenever θr ∈ Φ−
uv .

and
(2.16)

An integer q ∈ Z satisfying these properties exists if and only if the largest integer satisfying
the properties is the gcd g of the differences as r ranges over {1, ..., k}.
Now to see a), note that (iii) does not depend on p, so it can chosen to be any odd
integer. Because q ≤ g, it follows that a minimum time exists when p = 1 and q = g.
Property b) follows easily, and c) is in Theorem 2.4.2.
The following corollary is due to Kay [51], and our proof based on the result above is
different than the original.
31

2.4.5 Corollary. If perfect state transfer happens in X between u and v, and between u
and w, then v = w.
Proof. From Theorem 2.4.4, the minimum time in which perfect state transfer between u
and any vertex happens depends uniquely on Φu . If τ is such a time, we have
U (τ )eu = λ1 ev

and U (τ )eu = λ2 ew ,

hence ev = ew .

2.5

Strong cospectrality

In this section, we examine in more detail what it means for two vertices to be strongly
cospectral. We begin with some definitions. Let X be a graph and A its adjacency matrix
with spectral decomposition
d
X
θr Er .
A=
r=0

Definition. We say that u, v ∈ V (X) are cospectral if the spectra of the graphs X\u and
X\v are equal.
Definition. We say that u, v ∈ V (X) are parallel if Er eu is a multiple of Er ev for all
r ∈ {0, ..., d} whenever Er ev 6= 0.
Definition. The walk generating function of a graph X on n vertices is
X
tk Ak
W (X, t) =

(2.17)

k≥0

and the walk matrix of a subset S ⊂ V (X) with characteristic vector w = wS is



MS =  w Aw · · ·

32


An−1 w 

(2.18)

We will see that two vertices are strongly cospectral if and only if they are cospectral and
parallel, but first we present a characterization of cospectral vertices due partly to Godsil
and McKay (see [38]) and partly to Godsil. The corollary is due to Godsil (unpublished
notes).
2.5.1 Theorem. Let u, v ∈ V (X). The following statements are equivalent.
(i) u and v are cospectral.
(ii) W (X, t)u,u = W (X, t)v,v .
(iii) For each Er , with r = 0, ..., d, we have (Er )u,u = (Er )v,v .
(iv) With M{u} = Mu , we have MuT Mu = MvT Mv .
(v) The subspace h{Ak (eu + ev )}k≥0 i is orthogonal to the subspace h{Ak (eu − ev )}k≥0 i.
(vi) There is an orthogonal matrix Q that commutes with A such that Q2 = I and Qeu =
ev .
Proof.
(i) ⇔ (ii)

Note that
W (X, t) = (I − tA)−1 = t−1 (t−1 I − A)−1 .

Let φX (t) denote the characteristic polynomial of A(X) with variable t.
Gabriel’s rule1 , for all w ∈ V (X),
[(sI − A)−1 ]w,w =

From

φX\w (s)
det(sI − A(X\w))
=
,
det(sI − A(X))
φX (s)

So W (X, t)u,u = W (X, t)v,v if and only if φX\u (t) = φX\v (t).
(ii) ⇔ (iii) From Equation 2.17, (ii) holds if and only if (Ak )u,u = (Ak )v,v for all k ≥ 0.
From Corollary 2.1.7, this is equivalent to (Er )u,u = (Er )v,v for all r = 0, ..., d.
1

See Gabriel Cramer [23].

33

(ii) ⇔ (iv) Note that for any w ∈ V (X), we have (MwT Mw )ij = eTw Ai+j−2 ew , so (ii) is
equivalent to (iv).
(iii) ⇔ (v)

From Corollary 2.1.7, for all r and s, (v) is equivalent to
(eu + ev )T ErT Es (eu − ev ) = 0.

This is trivially true if r 6= s because then Er Es = O. If r = s, then
(eu + ev )T ErT Er (eu − ev ) = eTu Er eu − eTv Er ev ,
which is 0 if and only if (iii) holds.
(v) ⇒ (vi) Any linear transformation is defined in terms of its action on a subspace S
and its orthogonal complement S ⊥ . Let S = h{Ak (eu − ev )}k≥0 i. Define a matrix Q
by
(
−v if v ∈ S,
Qv =
v
if v ∈ S ⊥ .
Note that Q is orthogonally diagonalizable, hence symmetric, and that Q2 = I, thus
Q is an orthogonal matrix. Now Q commutes with A both in S and in S ⊥ , so it
commutes with A in general, and finally, from (v), Q fixes h{Ak (eu + ev )}k≥0 i. Hence
2Qeu = Q[(eu + ev ) + (eu − ev )] = (eu + ev ) + (ev − eu ) = 2ev .
(vi) ⇒ (iii) Let Q satisfy (vi). Then for all r = 0, ..., d, Corollary 2.1.7 implies that Q
commutes with Er , hence
eTu Er eu = eTu Er Q2 eu = eTu QT Er Qeu = eTv Er ev .

2.5.2 Corollary. Vertices u and v are strongly cospectral if and only if they are cospectral
and parallel.

34

Proof. Clearly if u and v are strongly cospectral, then they are parallel. So we suppose
they are parallel and show that strong cospectrality is equivalent to cospectrality. First
note that hEr eu , Er ev i = (Er )u,u , thus Er eu = 0 if and only if (Er )u,u = 0. So if u and v
are cospectral or if u and v are strongly cospectral, it follows that Er eu = 0 if and only if
Er ev = 0 for all r.
Now suppose that Er eu = λEr ev 6= 0. Then
(Er )u,u = λ(Er )u,v = λ(Er )v,u = λ2 (Er )v,v ,
thus they are strongly cospectral if and only if they are cospectral.
2.5.3 Corollary. The vertices u and v are strongly cospectral if and only if there is a
matrix Q satisfying the following conditions.
(i) Q is orthogonal, commutes with A, and satisfies Q2 = I and Qeu = ev .
(ii) Q is a polynomial in A.
Proof. We use the same construction as in Theorem 2.5.1, and so we just need to prove
the equivalence with (ii). If u and v are strongly cospectral, then the invariant subspaces
of Q are spanned by eigenvalues of A, hence if p(x) is a polynomial such that
(
−1 if θr ∈ Φ−
uv ,
p(θr ) =
1
otherwise,
then p(A) = Q. If Q is a polynomial in A, then it must be a signed sum of the idempotents
of A, and hence Qeu = ev implies Er eu = ±Er ev for all r.

35

Chapter 3
Distance-regular graphs and
association schemes
This chapter includes part of the material presented in Coutinho et al [21]. In Section
3.1, we develop a self contained introduction to distance-regular graphs and association
schemes. In the remaining sections, we will focus on the problem of finding new examples
of perfect state transfer. In Section 3.2, we present a necessary and sufficient condition for
a distance-regular graph to admit perfect state transfer, and as a consequence we find all
known distance-regular graphs that do so. Section 3.3 contains some results relating perfect
state transfer and graphs whose adjacency matrix belongs to the Bose-Mesner Algebra of
an association scheme.

3.1

Preliminaries

The classical reference for the study of distance-regular graphs is Brouwer, Cohen and
Neumaier (BCN) [13].
Definition. A set {A0 , ..., Ad } of 01-matrices of size n × n is a (symmetric) association
scheme if the following properties hold:

36

(i) the identity matrix I belongs to the set, say A0 = I;
(ii) Ai is symmetric for i = 0, . . . , d;
(iii)

d
X

Ak = J; and,

k=0

(iv) there exist integers pkij , called intersection numbers of the scheme , such that:
Ai Aj =

d
X

pkij Ak .

k=0

Definition. The matrices in {A0 , ..., Ad } are called the classes of the scheme. The matrix
algebra spanned by these matrices is the Bose-Mesner algebra of scheme, and is usually
denoted by the symbol A.
We will say that a graph belongs to an association scheme if its adjacency matrix is
contained in the Bose-Mesner algebra of the scheme.
Note that (ii) and (iv) imply that A0 , ..., Ad pairwise commute. Hence A is a commutative algebra, and the fact that J belongs to the algebra implies that any matrix in the
algebra has constant row and column sums.
Definition. The Schur product of matrices M and N of the same size is defined as
(M ◦ N )a,b = Ma,b · Na,b .
Note that for an association scheme {A0 , ..., Ad }, property 3.1.(iii) implies that
(
Ai if i = j,
Ai ◦ Aj =
0
otherwise.
Thus the Bose-Mesner algebra is closed under Schur product, and the matrices {A0 , ..., Ad }
are idempotents with respect to this product, also called Schur idempotents. A set of symmetric and pairwise commuting matrices can be simultaneously diagonalized (see Theorem
37

2.1.8), hence there exist idempotents for the conventional matrix product {E0 , ..., Em }
which also form a basis for the Bose-Mesner algebra. In particular m = d and any matrix
in A has at most d + 1 distinct eigenvalues.
The construction of non-trivial association schemes is not an easy task. We now describe
a construction based on graphs that exhibit a high level of regularity.
Definition. A connected graph X of diameter d is called a distance-regular graph if there
exist numbers bi , ci with 0 ≤ i ≤ d such that for any two vertices u and v at distance
i in X, the number of neighbours of v at distance i − 1 from u is ci and the number of
neighbours of v at distance i + 1 from u is bi (note that these numbers do not depend on
the choice of u and v). Here we convention that c−1 = 0.
This definition implies that the graph is regular with valency b0 , and also that there
exist numbers ai which are the number of neighbours of v at distance i from u. They do
not depend on u and v because ai is determined in terms of bi and ci by
b 0 = c i + ai + b i .

(3.1)

Definition. Let X be a distance-regular graph of diameter d. The intersection array of
X is the list of parameters {b0 , b1 , ..., bd−1 ; c1 , c2 , ..., cd }.
The following proposition provides a well-known necessary condition for an array of
numbers to be the intersection array of a distance-regular graph.
3.1.1 Proposition (BCN [13], Proposition 4.1.6). If {b0 , b1 , ..., bd−1 ; c1 , c2 , ..., cd } is the
intersection array of a distance-regular graph, then b0 > b1 ≥ b2 ≥ ... ≥ bd−1 > 0 and
1 = c1 ≤ c2 ≤ ... ≤ cd ≤ b0 .
Definition. Given X, we define the distance graphs Xi as the graphs with vertex set V (X)
and two vertices adjacent if and only if they are at distance i in X. We also define distance
matrices Ai (X) = A(Xi ), with A0 = I.
By definition of a distance-regular graph, the matrices {A0 , A, A2 , ..., Ad } satisfy
AAi = bi−1 Ai−1 + ai Ai + ci+1 Ai+1 .
38

(3.2)

In particular, the matrices Ai can be written as a polynomial of degree i in A for all i ≥ 1.
By induction and using the equation above, one can prove that there exist intersection
numbers of the graph pkij , which depend only on the intersection array, such that
Ai Aj =

d
X

pkij Ak .

k=0

The combinatorial interpretation of these numbers is that for any two vertices u and v at
distance k, there are precisely pkij vertices in the graph at distance i from u and j from v.
If X is a distance-regular graph of diameter d, the matrices {A0 , A1 , ..., Ad } form an
association scheme, and the intersection numbers of the graph coincide with those of the
scheme.
Definition. A distance-regular graph X of diameter d is primitive if the graphs Xi for
i ∈ {1, ..., d} are all connected, and imprimitive otherwise.
Definition. If Xd is the disjoint union of cliques of the same size, then X is called antipodal ,
and the cliques in Xd are the fibres or antipodal classes of the graph. If a fibre contains
only two vertices, we will say that they are antipodal vertices of the graph.
3.1.2 Theorem (BCN [13], Theorem 4.2.1). Let X be a distance-regular graph of valency
at least 3. If X is imprimitive, then X is either bipartite or antipodal.
We end this section with a remark about distance-regular graphs and association
schemes. Typically, one wishes to find new constructions of such structures, or to find
constraints that the intersection numbers must satisfy. Intersection numbers that correspond to known constructions or that cannot be ruled out by any known constraints are
usually called feasible parameter sets. Despite the efforts of many in the past decades, the
gap between the known constructions and the feasible parameter sets is still very large. No
original work in this thesis succeeds in reducing this gap1 . We will rather examine feasible
parameter sets and determine whether or not a corresponding graph admits perfect state
transfer.
1

But surely wishes.

39

3.2

Perfect state transfer on distance-regular graphs

We start this section with a necessary condition for graphs belonging to association schemes
to admit perfect state transfer. The result is due to Godsil [33], and the explicit proof below
is from Coutinho et al. [21].
3.2.1 Theorem ([33], Theorem 4.1 and Lemma 6.1). Let X be a graph that belongs to an
association scheme with d + 1 classes and with adjacency matrix A. If X admits perfect
state transfer at time τ , then there is a permutation matrix T with no fixed points and of
order two such that UA (τ ) = λT for some λ ∈ C. Moreover, T is a class of the scheme. If
the graph is distance-regular of diameter d, then it must be antipodal with fibres of size 2
and T = Ad .
P
Proof. Recall from Equation 2.11 that U (t) = dr=0 eitθr Er . Thus, for any t ∈ R, the
matrix U (t) belongs to the Bose-Mesner algebra of the scheme. Let u, v ∈ V (X) be such
that U (τ )eu = λev . Any matrix in the algebra commutes with J and so has constant row
and column sums. The matrix U (τ ) has a row with a unique non-zero entry and it can
be written as a linear combination of Schur idempotents. Because the Schur idempotents
have disjoint support, U (t) must be a multiple of one Schur idempotent T .
Note that T eu = ev . So the row and column sums of T are equal to 1. Therefore T is a
permutation matrix. Since T 6= A0 , the permutation represented by T has no fixed points,
and because U (τ ) is symmetric, we have that T is a permutation matrix of order 2.
Now if X is distance-regular, let i be the index for which Ai = T . Suppose 0 < i < d,
and so d > 1. Because v is the only vertex at distance i from u, we have bi−1 = 1. By
Proposition 3.1.1, this implies that bj = 1 for all j ≥ i. In particular, there will be a unique
vertex at distance d from u, and this vertex will have degree 1, so b0 = 1 and therefore the
graph is K2 and d = 1, a contradiction. Therefore Ad = T , and the distance-regular graph
is antipodal with fibres of size 2.
In the context of Theorem 3.2.1, perfect state transfer in a distance-regular graph must
be between a pair of antipodal vertices.

40

3.2.2 Lemma. If X is an antipodal distance-regular graph with fibres of size 2, distinct
eigenvalues θ0 > ... > θd , and if u and v are a pair of antipodal vertices, then
(i) u and v are strongly cospectral, and
(ii) Er eu = (−1)r Er ev for all idempotents Er , with r = 0, ..., d.
Proof. Note that (ii) =⇒ (i) trivially. Condition (ii) is simply a consequence of known
results about sign changes in Sturm sequences (see Godsil [36, Section 8.5]), but we will
provide an elementary proof of this fact in Chapter 6.
If X is a distance-regular graph, note that the idempotents Er are linear combinations
of the distance matrices of X. Thus each row or column of each Er contains non-zero
elements. As a consequence, the eigenvalue support of each vertex in a distance-regular
graph is equal to the set of all distinct eigenvalues of X.
We present the following characterization of perfect state transfer in distance-regular
graphs.
3.2.3 Theorem. Suppose X is a distance-regular graph with distinct eigenvalues θ0 > ... >
θd . Then X admits perfect state transfer between vertices u and v at time τ if and only
the following holds.
(i) The eigenvalues of X are integers.
(ii) X is antipodal with fibres of size 2, and u and v are antipodal vertices.
(iii) If g = gcd({θ0 − θr }dr=1 ), then
θ0 − θr
is even for all r even.
g
θ0 − θr
b)
is odd for all r odd.
g

a)

Under these condition, τ0 =

π
is the minimum time at which perfect state transfer between
g

u and v occurs.
41

Proof. Because X is regular, Corollary 2.1.10 implies that there is at least one non-zero
integer in the eigenvalue support of each vertex of X. Thus Theorem 2.4.3 implies that
(i) is a necessary condition. From Theorem 3.2.1, (ii) is necessary. Now suppose both are
true.
In the context of Theorem 2.4.4, Lemma 3.2.2 is saying that θr ∈ Φ+
uv if r is even, and
−
r ∈ Φuv if r is odd. Thus condition (iii) above is equivalent to condition 2.4.4.(iii), and so
equivalent to the existence of perfect state transfer between u and v. The expression for
the time also follows from Theorem 2.4.4.
We have an important remark at this point. The distance partition relative to a fixed
vertex in any distance-regular graph is an equitable partition. Its quotient is a weighted
path with loops allowed at each vertex. A consequence of Theorem 3.2.1 is that if a
distance-regular graph X admits perfect state transfer between u and v, then {u} and {v}
are singletons at maximum distance in the distance partition of u. It follows that perfect
state transfer also happens between these two vertices in the corresponding weighted path,
and that any simple graph in which the quotient of the distance partition relative to u is
equal to that weighted path will also admit perfect state transfer between u and v. In other
words, we can alter the edges in X maintaining the parameters of the distance partition of
u and still have perfect state transfer. The downside is that this new graph will most likely
no longer be a distance-regular graph, and so perfect state transfer will happen between u
and v, but usually not between any other pair of vertices. In our approach below, we will
focus only on finding distance-regular graphs admitting perfect state transfer, even though
we could find many more examples based on each of them.
Quotienting and lifting in the context of perfect state transfer was studied in [5]. We
will readdress this topic in Chapter 6, including a better explanation of the discussion
above. For now, we determine which known distance-regular graphs admit perfect state
transfer.

3.2.1

Diameter two

The observation in this subsection is due to Coutinho et al. [21].
42

The distance-regular graphs of diameter 2 are also known as (connected) strongly regular
graphs (see Godsil and Royle [42, Chapter 10]).
The intersection array of a strongly regular graph is determined by the 4-tuple (n, k, a, c),
where n is the number of vertices, k is the valency, a is the number of common neighbours
of two adjacent vertices, and c is the number of common neighbours of two non-adjacent
vertices. Such a graph is antipodal if and only if being at distance 0 or 2 is an equivalence
relation, and in terms of the parameters, this implies that c = k and a = 2k − v. It follows
that the graphs are complete multipartite with classes of size v − k. By Theorem 3.2.1,
perfect state transfer happens only if v − k = 2, in which case the graph is the complement
of a disjoint union of m copies of K2 . The distinct eigenvalues of such graphs are
{2m − 2, 0, −2}.
Hence, using Theorem 3.2.3, we have:
3.2.4 Corollary. Perfect state transfer happens in distance-regular graphs of diameter 2
if and only if the graph is the complement of a disjoint union of m copies of K2 with m
even. In that case, perfect state transfer happens at time π2 .

3.2.2

Diameter three

Antipodal distance-regular graphs of diameter 3 have a special structure that we introduce
below.
Definition. A graph X is called a covering graph if there is a partition of its vertex set into
independent cells such that between any two such cells either there are no edges or there
is a perfect matching. We say that X is a covering of Y if the vertices of Y correspond to
the cells of the partition on X, two vertices of Y being adjacent if and only if there is a
matching between the corresponding cells. If Y is connected, all cells of X must have the
same size, say r, and in this case X is an r-fold covering of Y .
We refer to Sections 2 and 3 of Godsil and Hensel [37] for the basic results about
antipodal distance-regular graphs of diameter three that we present below.
43

3.2.5 Theorem ([37], Theorem 2.1). Any antipodal distance-regular graph of diameter 3
is an r-fold covering of Kn for some n. The size of each antipodal class is equal to r.
Recall from Section 3.1 the definition of intersection numbers and intersection array of
a distance-regular graph.
3.2.6 Theorem ([37], Lemma 3.1). Let X be a distance-regular r-fold covering of Kn . Let
c = p211 , that is, the number of common neighbours of two vertices at distance 2. Then the
intersection numbers of X depend only on n, r and c, and the intersection array of X is
given by
{n − 1, (r − 1)c, 1; 1, c, n − 1}
Definition. We will refer to antipodal distance-regular graphs of diameter 3 with parameters (n, r, c) as (n, r, c)-covers. Given a (n, r, c)-cover, we define the parameters
δ = n − rc − 2 and ∆ = δ 2 + 4(n − 1).
3.2.7 Theorem ([37], Section 3). The distinct eigenvalues of a (n, r, c)-cover are
(
√ )
√
δ− ∆
δ+ ∆
, −1,
.
n − 1,
2
2

(3.3)

And finally, a theorem due to Godsil and Hensel.
3.2.8 Theorem ([37], Theorem 3.6). For fixed values of r and δ, there are only finitely
many feasible parameter sets for distance-regular covers of Kn , unless δ = −2, δ = 0 or
δ = 2.
Recall that r is the size of an antipodal class. By Theorem 3.2.1, a search for perfect
state transfer in (n, r, c)-covers only needs to consider the case where r = 2. We assume
r = 2 henceforth.
3.2.9 Theorem ([42], Chapter 11). Let X be a (n, 2, c)-cover. The graph induced by the
neighbourhood of a vertex of X is a strongly regular graph with parameters


3c
n−c−2
n − 1, n − c − 2, n −
− 3,
.
2
2
44

Equivalently, any strongly regular graph with such parameters can be extended to construct
a (n, 2, c)-cover.
We now start our classification of (n, 2, c)-covers admitting perfect state transfer. We
proceed via the case analysis suggested by Theorem 3.2.8.
3.2.10 Theorem. A (n, 2, c)-cover with δ = 0 does not admit perfect state transfer.
Proof. If δ = 0, then n = 2c + 2 and ∆ = 4(n − 1), and the distinct eigenvalues are
{n − 1,

√

√
n − 1, −1, − n − 1}.

If perfect state transfer occurs, Theorem 3.2.3 implies that the eigenvalues must be integers,
hence (n − 1) must be a square, thus n is congruent to 2 modulo 4. Note that n =
(n − 1) − (−1) and (n − 1) and (−1) are eigenvalues with the same parity. Therefore
Theorem 3.2.3 implies that if perfect state transfer occurs in this case, it will occur at time
π
, with b an odd number, and so the differences between eigenvalues with different parities
b
√
must be odd. But n − 1 and n − 1 are both odd, hence their difference is even. We
conclude that in this case perfect state transfer cannot occur.
For δ 6= 0, the following proposition says that the other cases occur in pairs (see for
instance BCN [13, p.431]).
3.2.11 Proposition. Suppose X is (n, 2, c)-cover. Then the distance 2 graph X2 is a

n, 2, (n − c − 2) -cover, and so δ(X2 ) = −δ(X).
We determine the structure of the (n, 2, c)-covers with δ = −2. We will provide a
simplified form of [37, Lemma 8.2 ] and a proof due to the author, but first a definition.
Definition. A Hadamard matrix of order n is a n × n matrix H with entries in {1, −1}
such that
HH T = H T H = In .

45

Example 4. The following matrix is an example of a symmetric Hadamard matrix with
constant diagonal,


1 1
1
1
1 1 −1 −1



,
1 −1 1 −1
1 −1 −1

1

and so by Theorem 3.2.12 below is equivalent to a (4, 2, 2)-cover. In this case, the graph
will be the cube.
Let X be a (n, 2, c)-cover with δ = −2. Order the antipodal pairs from 1 to n, and for
each antipodal pair define an arbitrary ordering of its vertices. Define a square matrix B
of order n indexed by the antipodal pairs of X as follows.


0,
if i = j;




+1, if the matching between pairs i and j agrees with their
Bij =


respective orderings;




−1, otherwise.
3.2.12 Theorem. Given a (n, 2, c)-cover with δ = −2 and a matrix B as above, the
matrix (B + I) is a symmetric Hadamard matrix with constant diagonal. Conversely, every

symmetric Hadamard matrix with constant diagonal and order n yields a n, 2, n2 -cover.
Proof. Clearly the diagonal entries of (B + I)2 are equal to n. Now consider an entry (i, j),
associated to antipodal pairs (ai , bi ) and (aj , bj ). If ai ∼ aj and bi ∼ bj , then (B + I)ij = 1.
Whenever rows i and j agree in a coordinate k which is neither i or j, that means we have
a common neighbour of ai and aj , and if they disagree, we have a common neighbour of ai
and bj . Hence they agree in (n − c − 2) coordinates and disagree in c of them. So the dot
product of rows i and j is equal to 2+(n−c−2)−c = 0 if and only if δ = −2. If ai ∼ bj and
aj ∼ bi , we have that the dot product between rows i and j will be −2 − (n − c − 2) + c = 0
again. So (B + I) is a symmetric Hadamard matrix of constant diagonal. The converse is
proved similarly.

46

Example 5. Consider the Hadamard matrix of Example 4. Following the steps of the
proof above, we can easily construct the adjacency matrix of the corresponding (4, 2, 2)cover as follows. First turn the diagonal entries into 0. Replace these entries by the zero
matrix of dimension two, then replace all entries equal to +1 by I2 , and all entries equal
to −1 by A(K2 ). The resulting matrix is the adjacency matrix of the cube:


0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0


0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 


1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 


0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 


.

1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 


0 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 




1 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 
0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0
If X is a (n, 2, c)-cover with δ = −2, it follows from arithmetic conditions on the
multiplicities of the eigenvalues of X that n must be a square (see Godsil and Hensel
[37, Lemma 3.7]). This can also be derived as a necessary condition for the existence of
symmetric Hadamard matrices of constant diagonal.
It is also a known fact that Hadamard matrices can only exist when n is 1, 2 or a
multiple of 4 (see for instance BCN [13, Section 1.8]).
3.2.13 Theorem. Every (n, 2, c)-cover with δ = −2 admits perfect state transfer at time
√π . For δ = +2, perfect state transfer occurs if and only if n is divisible by 8, and in that
n
case it occurs at time π2 .
Proof. Let X be a (n, 2, c)-cover with δ = −2, and so n is an even perfect square. Using
Equation 3.3, its set of distinct eigenvalues will be
√
√
{n − 1, n − 1, −1, − n − 1}.
π
Applying Theorem 3.2.3, we see that perfect state transfer will occur at time √ . If
n
δ = +2, then the set of distinct eigenvalues is
√
√
{n − 1, n + 1, −1, − n + 1}.
47

√
If |n|2 = 2−2 , then |(n − 1) − ( n + 1)|2 = |(n − 1) − (−1)|2 , and so perfect state transfer
cannot occur. If |n|2 < 2−2 , then it is easy to check that perfect state transfer will occur
at time π2 .
Symmetric Hadamard matrices of order n with constant diagonal can be constructed
for every n which is a power of 4 as the iterated Kronecker product of the matrix depicted
in Example 4.
Perfect state transfer was already known for the case δ = −2 (see Godsil [33]), but
unknown for the case δ = +2.
Now we move to the case where δ ∈
/ {0, −2, 2}. As we saw in Proposition 3.2.11, for
every cover with parameter δ, there exists a corresponding cover with parameter −δ.
3.2.14 Theorem. Let X be a (n, 2, c)-cover, and X2 the corresponding (n, 2, n − c − 2)cover. Suppose δ ∈
/ {0, −2, 2}.
π
, for
a) If δ ≡ 2 mod 4, then perfect state transfer occurs either in X or in X2 at time 2α
some α which is an odd integer.

b) If δ is odd or a multiple of 4, perfect state transfer does not occur in either X or X2 .
Proof. Let ρ > 0 and σ < 0 be the eigenvalues of X which are neither (n − 1) nor −1. Let
mρ and mσ be their corresponding multiplicities, which can be computed in terms of n, r
and c (see Godsil and Hensel [37, Section 3]). Then
nδ
mρ − mσ = √ ,
∆
This is a difference of integers, so δ 6= 0 implies that ∆ must be a perfect square. Note that
√
√
σ = 12 (δ − ∆) is an algebraic integer, hence an integer. Thus ∆ − δ is even. Suppose
that ∆ = (2t + δ)2 . The parameter n is now parametrized as n = 1 + t2 + tδ.
Note that if n is odd, then perfect state transfer cannot occur by Theorem 3.2.3. If δ
is odd, then n = δ + 2c + 2 is odd. If t is even, then n is also odd. So suppose δ is even
and t is odd.
48

If δ is a multiple of 4, then n = 1 + t2 + tδ ≡ 2 mod 4. Perfect state transfer occurs
only if (n − 1) − ρ and (n − 1) − σ are both odd. Hence ρ and σ are both even. But note
that σ = −t and t is odd.
If δ ≡ 2 mod 4, then n = 1+t2 +tδ ≡ 0 mod 4. Let ρ2 > 0 and σ2 > 0 be the non-trivial
eigenvalues of X2 . Note that:
ρ = δ + t and σ = −t,
and
ρ2 = t and σ2 = −δ − t.
If t ≡ 3 mod 4, then (n − 1) − (δ + t) and (n − 1) + t are both congruent to 2 modulo 4,
π
, where 2α is the greatest
so by Theorem 3.2.3 perfect state transfer occurs in X at time 2α
common divisor of the differences of the eigenvalues of X. If t ≡ 1 mod 4, then (n − 1) − t
and (n − 1) − (−δ − t) are both congruent to 2 modulo 4, so perfect state transfer occurs in
π
X2 at time 2α
, where 2α is the greatest common divisor of the differences of the eigenvalues
of X2 .
Note that in the case where δ ≡ 2 mod 4, the theorem above implies that perfect state
transfer occurs in at least one of X and X2 . It is possible that perfect state transfer occurs
in both, but in that case it will be at different times.
Table 3.1 below contains parameter sets for which a corresponding cover admits perfect state transfer, for n < 280. The strongly regular graph on the first neighbourhood
of a vertex in each of these covers is given in the rightmost column. We consult Andries
Brouwer’s website (http://www.win.tue.nl/∼aeb/graphs/srg/srgtab.html) to either provide a construction for such a graph, hence a construction for the cover, or to state that
no such construction is known.

49

Table 3.1: Perfect state transfer in distance-regular graphs of diameter 3.
c
δ
time
construction of strongly regular graph
n
28 10
6
π/2
complement of Schläfli graph
not known
76 42 −10 π/2
not known
96 40 14 π/4
96 54 −14 π/6
not known
complement of O− (8, 2) polar graph
120 54 10 π/6
136 70 −6 π/2
complement of O+ (8, 2) polar graph
148 66 14 π/2
not known
176 72 30 π/4
complement of the one below
176 102 −30 π/2
line graph of Hoffman-Singleton graph
244 130 −18 π/2
not known
276 162 −50 π/6 complement of McLaughlin graph McL.2 / U4(3).2

3.2.3

Larger diameter

We do not analyse this case in the same detail as we did for the diameter three case. The
reason is that the known constructions of antipodal distance-regular graphs of diameter
> 3 are scarcer, and so we prefer to just exhibit which known graphs admit perfect state
transfer. The work in this subsection is due to Coutinho et al. [21].
The results below are straightforward corollaries of Theorem 3.2.3. We refer to BCN
[13, Chapters 9, 11 and 13] for the definition and further details of the graphs mentioned
in them.
3.2.15 Corollary. The graphs below are examples of distance-regular graphs of diameter
larger than three admitting perfect state transfer.
(i) Hamming d-cubes. Number of vertices: 2d . Valency: d. Diameter: d. Distinct
eigenvalues: {d − 2i : i = 0, ..., d}. Time of perfect state transfer: π2 .
50


(ii) Halved 2d-cubes. Number of vertices: 22d−1 . Valency: 2d
. Diameter: d. Distinct
2
 2d
eigenvalues:
− 2i(2d − i) : i = 0, ..., d . Time of perfect state transfer: π2 .
2
(iii) Hadamard graphs2 of order n if and only if n is a perfect square. Exist for infinitely
many values of n, in particular for all n which are powers of 4. Number of vertices:
4n. Valency: n. Diameter: 4. Time of perfect state transfer: √πn .
(iv) Meixner graph (Martin et al. [58, Example 3.5]). Number of vertices: 1344. Valency:
176. Diameter: 4. Distinct eigenvalues: {176, 44, 8, −4, −16}. Time of perfect state
π
.
transfer: 12
(v) Coset graph of the once shortened and once truncated binary Golay code. Number of
vertices: 1024. Valency: 21. Diameter: 6. Distinct eigenvalues: {21, 9, 5, 1, −3, −7, −11}.
Time of perfect state transfer: π4 .
(vi) Coset graph of the shortened binary Golay code. Number of vertices: 2048. Valency:
22. Diameter: 6. Distinct eigenvalues: {22, 8, 6, 0, −2, −8, −10}. Time of perfect
state transfer: π2 .
(vii) Double coset graph of truncated binary Golay code. Number of vertices: 2048. Valency: 22. Diameter: 7. Distinct eigenvalues: {22, 10, 6, 2, −2, −6, −10, −22}. Time
of perfect state transfer: π4 .
(viii) Double coset graph of binary Golay code. Number of vertices: 4096. Valency: 23.
Diameter: 7. Distinct eigenvalues: {23, 9, 7, 1, −1, −7, −9, −23}. Time of perfect
state transfer: π2 .
3.2.16 Corollary. No graph in the following infinite families of antipodal distance-regular
graphs with classes of size two admits perfect state transfer.
(i) Johnson graphs J(2n, n) for n > 1. Their distinct eigenvalues are {(n − j)2 − j},
with j ∈ {0, ..., n}.
(ii) Doubled odd graphs on 2n+1 points. Their distinct eigenvalues are {(−1)j (n+1−j)},
with j ∈ {0, 1, ..., n − 1, n, n + 2, n + 3, ..., 2n + 2}.
2

These are not those mentioned in Subsection 3.2.2.

51

We also checked graphs with diameter larger than 3 depicted in tables of BCN [13,
Chapter 14] that do not belong to the infinite families above.
3.2.17 Corollary. None of the following antipodal distance-regular graphs with classes of
size two and diameter larger than three admit perfect state transfer.
(i) Wells graph of diameter 4. Some eigenvalues are not integral.
(ii) Double Hoffman-Singleton Graph of diameter 5. Distinct eigenvalues are {7, 3, 2, −2,
− 3, −7}.
(iii) Double Gewirtz Graph of diameter 5. Distinct eigenvalues are {10, 4, 2, −2, −4, −10}.
(iv) Double 77-Graph of diameter 5. Distinct eigenvalues are {16, 6, 2, −2, −6, −16}.
(v) Double Higman-Sims Graph of diameter 5. Distinct eigenvalues are {22, 8, 2, −2, −8,
− 22}.
(vi) Dodecahedron of diameter 5. Distinct eigenvalues are not integer.

3.3

Perfect state transfer on association schemes

Consider an association scheme {A0 , ..., Ad }. Any sum of distinct Schur idempotents is
a 01-matrix and in particular defines a graph. We recall that we say that such a graph
belongs to the association scheme. Our intent in this section is to construct new examples
of perfect state transfer among such graphs.
3.3.1 Proposition. If A and B are commuting matrices, then
exp(it(A + B)) = exp(itA) exp(itB).

We also recall two important facts in the following corollary (see Theorems 2.4.3 and
3.2.1).
52

3.3.2 Corollary. If X is a graph belonging to an association scheme admitting perfect
state transfer at time τ , then
a) U (τ ) is a multiple of a permutation matrix of order two and no fixed points that belongs
to the Bose-Mesner algebra of the scheme; and
b) the eigenvalues of X are integers, and therefore τ = πg for some integer g.
As a consequence, we can construct new examples of graphs admitting perfect state
transfer based on old examples.
3.3.3 Corollary. Suppose X is a graph belonging to an association scheme admitting
perfect state transfer at time τ = πg with phase λ. Let A = A(X). Say U (τ ) = λT . Let B
be a 01-matrix belonging to the scheme satisfying the following properties.
a) The 1s of B are in disjoint positions from those of A.
b) The eigenvalues of B are integers.
c) Either |θ|2 = |g|2 for all eigenvalues θ of B, or |θ|2 < |g|2 for all eigenvalues θ of B.
Then A + B is the adjacency matrix of a graph, and UA+B (τ ) = λ0 T , where λ0 = ±λ.
Proof. From a), A + B is the adjacency matrix of a graph. Conditions b) and c) imply
that
UB (τ ) = ±I,
and so from Proposition 3.3.1, we have
UA+B (τ ) = UA (τ )UB (τ ) = ±λT.

A standard way of constructing association schemes is using the tensor product of
matrices. We explain below.
53

Consider two association schemes {A0 , ..., Ad } and {B0 , ..., Be }. The set of matrices
obtained by taking the Kronecker product of the matrices in both schemes
{Ai ⊗ Bj : 0 ≤ i ≤ d and 0 ≤ j ≤ e}
is an association scheme with (de + d + e) classes (see Bailey [6, Chapter 3]). It is the
tensor product of the original schemes.
The direct product 3 of graphs X and Y is defined to be the graph with adjacency
matrix A(X) ⊗ A(Y ), and is usually denoted by X × Y . In Chapter 4, we will readdress
the problem of characterizing perfect state transfer in graph products in a more general and
detailed framework. Here we will present a particular case that provides a good number
of examples of graphs belonging to association schemes admitting perfect state transfer.
The direct product of a graph X with K2 is also referred to as the bipartite double
of X. If X is distance-regular, X × K2 belongs to the tensor product of the schemes
{I, A(X), A2 (X), ...., Ad (X)} and {I2 , A(K2 )}.
3.3.4 Theorem. Let V (K2 ) = {v1 , v2 }. Suppose X is distance-regular on n vertices with
eigenvalues θ0 > ... > θd , and let θr = 2fr `r , where `r is an odd integer. For any vertex
u ∈ V (X), the graph X × K2 admits perfect state transfer between (u, v1 ) and (u, v2 ) if and
only if both conditions hold:
(i) For all r, we have fr = a for some constant a.
(ii) For all r and s, we have `r ≡ `s mod 4.
Under these conditions, perfect state transfer occurs at time 2 gcd{θπ0 ,...,θd } .
Proof. It follows from the definition of direct product that the eigenvalues of X × K2 are
±θi . Note that the matrix In ⊗ A(K2 ) is a permutation matrix of order two having no
fixed points, and that
(In ⊗ A(K2 ))(E+θi ) = E+θi

and (In ⊗ A(K2 ))(E−θi ) = −E−θi .

Condition (iii) of Theorem 2.4.4 is equivalent to the two conditions below. Here g is the
gcd of the differences of the eigenvalues of X × K2 .
3

See Section 4.2.

54

(1) |θr − θs |2 < |g|2 for all r and s; and
(2) |θr − (−θs )|2 = |g|2 for all r and s.
If r = s, then (2) is equivalent to Condition (i) of the statement. Assuming Condition (i),
(1) and (2) are equivalent to
s
even, for all r and s; and
(1’) `r −`
2
s
(2’) `r +`
odd, for all r and s.
2

which is equivalent to Condition (ii). The time follows from the expression for time given
in Theorem 2.4.4.
The following corollaries are due to Coutinho et al. [21], and they exhibit some new
examples of perfect state transfer. Note that the distance between vertices involved in
perfect state transfer in these examples is the odd girth of the graph. The definition of
these graphs can be found in Godsil and Royle [42, Chapter 10] for strongly regular graphs
or in BCN [13] for distance-regular graphs. For generalized quadrangles, a more detailed
account can be found in [61].
3.3.5 Corollary. The following bipartite doubles of strongly regular graphs admit perfect
state transfer.
(i) Bipartite doubles of the point graphs of generalized quadrangles GQ(s, t) whenever q
is a prime power and one of the following conditions hold:
s = q − 1, t = q + 1 with q ≡ 0 mod 4,
s = q, t = q 2 with q ≡ 7 mod 8,
s = q 3 , t = q 2 with q ≡ 7 mod 8,
t = 1 , with s ≡ 7 mod 8.
Number of vertices: 2(st + 1)(s + 1). Valency: s(t + 1). Perfect state transfer at π4 .
55

(ii) Bipartite doubles of the complements of the point graphs of generalized quadrangles
GQ(s, t) whenever q is a prime power and one of the following conditions hold:
π
,
s = q, t = q 2 , with q ≡ 3 mod 4: perfect state transfer at 2q
π
s = q 2 , t = q, with q ≡ 3 mod 4: perfect state transfer at 2q
,

s = q − 1, t = q + 1, with q even : perfect state transfer at π2 ,
s = q + 1, t = q − 1, with q even: perfect state transfer at π2 ,
s = q 2 , t = q 3 , with q ≡ 3 mod 4: perfect state transfer at 2qπ2 ,
s = q 3 , t = q 2 , with q ≡ 3 mod 4: perfect state transfer at 2qπ2 .
Number of vertices: 2(st + 1)(s + 1). Valency: s2 t.
2
(iii) Bipartite doubles of orthogonal array graphs OA(n, m) if |n|2 ≤ |m|
. Number of
4
2π
2
vertices: 2n . Valency: m(n − 1). Perfect state transfer at gcd(n,4m) .
2
(iv) Bipartite doubles of complements of orthogonal array graphs OA(n, m) if |n|2 ≤ m−1|
.
4
2
2
Number of vertices: 2n . Valency: n − m(n − 1) − 1. Perfect state transfer at
2π
.
gcd(n,4(m−1))

3.3.6 Corollary. The following bipartite doubles of distance-regular graphs with classical
parameters admit perfect state transfer.
(i) Bipartite doubles of Grassmann graphs
Jq (n, d) (n ≥ 2d) for n even, d odd and

n−d
q ≡ 3 mod 4. Classical parameters: d, q, q, q q q−1−1 . Perfect state transfer at π2 .
(ii) Bipartite doubles of Hamming graphs H(d, q) when |q|2 ≤ |4d|2 . Classical parameters:
2π
.
(d, 1, 0, q − 1). Perfect state transfer at gcd(q,4d)
(iii) Bipartite doubles of Doob graphs of odd diameter. Classical parameters: (d, 1, 0, 3).
Perfect state transfer at π2 .
(iv) Bipartite doubles of unitary dual polar graphs 2 A2d−1 (q) and 2 A2d (q), both cases when
|q + 1|2 ≤ |4d|2 . Classical parameters: (d, q 2 , 0, q) and (d, q 2 , 0, q 3 ), respectively. Per2π
.
fect state transfer at gcd(q+1,4d)
56

(v) Bipartite doubles of parabolic and symplectic dual polar graphs Bd (q) and Cd (q) when
q ≡ 3 mod 4 and d is odd. Classical parameters: (d, q, 0, q). Perfect state transfer at
π
.
2
(vi) Bipartite doubles of half dual polar graph of diameter d on 2d-spaces when |q +
2d−1
1|2 ≤ |4d|2 . Classical parameters: d, q 2 , q 2 + q, q q q−1−1 . Perfect state transfer
π
at 2 gcd(d,q+1)
.
(vii) Bipartite doubles of half dual polar graph of diameter
d on 2d + 1-spaces
when |(q +


2d+1 −1
q
1)(q 2 + 1)|2 ≤ |4d|2 . Classical parameters: d, q 2 , q 2 + q, q q−1 . Perfect state
transfer at
2π

.
2d+1
2d −1
gcd (q + 1)(q 2 + 1), 4 q q2 −1−1 qq−1
(viii) Bipartite doubles of exceptional graphsof Lie type when q ≡ 11 mod 12 or when
4 −1
9 −1
, q qq−1
. In the first case, perfect
q ≡ 3, 7 mod 12. Classical parameters: 3, q 4 , q qq−1
π
π
state transfer at time 6 . In the second, at time 2 .
(ix) Bipartite doubles of all affine E6 graphs when q is even. Classical parameters: (3, q 4 , q 4 −
1, q 9 − 1). Perfect state transfer at π2 .
(x) Bipartite doubles of all alternating forms graphs when q is even. Classical parameters:
(d, q 2 , q 2 − 1, q 2d−1 − 1) and (d, q 2 , q 2 − 1, q 2d+1 − 1) for forms on 2d- and on 2d + 1spaces, respectively. Perfect state transfer at π2 .
(xi) Bipartite doubles of all Hermitian forms graphs when q is even. Classical parameters:
(d, −q, −q − 1, −(−q)d − 1). Perfect state transfer at π2 .

57

Chapter 4
Graph products and double-covers
This chapter examines in detail how perfect state transfer in certain graph products relates
to properties of the factors. The methods we introduce in this chapter can be used to study
state transfer in graphs whose adjacency matrix is a sum of Kronecker products of matrices.
First, we present an overview of our methods, restricting to the case in which the
adjacency matrix of the graph X is of the form
A(X) = B ⊗ C + M ⊗ N
with B, C, M, N symmetric matrices. All significant examples we have are graphs of this
form.
Following this, we study in detail perfect state transfer in the direct product of graphs.
This problem was studied by Ge et al. [31]. In particular, they showed that X × H
admits perfect state transfer if X admits perfect state transfer at a time τ , τπθ ∈ Z for all
eigenvalues θ of X, and H is a circulant graph with odd eigenvalues. Here we will generalize
their work. On one hand, we first show that if X × Y admits perfect state transfer, then
at least one of the factors must admit perfect state transfer (similarly to what happens
with the Cartesian product of graphs). On the other hand, we show that the hypothesis
on the other factor can be significantly weakened, in particular, H need not be a circulant
nor have odd eigenvalues. For example, we show that under somewhat similar integrality
58

conditions on the eigenvalues, if X admits perfect state transfer and the 2-adic norm of
the integer part of the eigenvalues of Y is constant, then X k ⊗ Y admits perfect state
transfer for some sufficiently large values of k.
We then proceed to show how our methods can be used in other notions of graph
products, in particular, we will show that the sufficient condition for perfect state transfer in
the lexicographic product of regular graphs presented by Ge et al. [31] is also necessary. We
will also show that perfect state transfer in the strong product of graphs can be determined
using the same methods we used for the direct product.
Finally, we will apply our methods to graphs which are double-covers of other graphs,
focusing on double-covers of the complete graph. Here we will find new examples of perfect
state transfer.

4.1

Framework for studying state transfer in products

In this section, we will introduce a very general method for determining whether perfect
state transfer is possible in graphs which are sums of tensor products of 01-matrices. For
the purpose of simplifying the notation, we will restrict our considerations to graphs X
such that
A(X) = B ⊗ C + M ⊗ N
with B, C, M, N symmetric matrices, but both the number of terms of the sum and the
number of factors in each term can be generalized to any positive integer, as we will see in
Section 4.3.
Definition. The Cartesian product of graphs X and Y is denoted by XY and is defined
as the graph with adjacency matrix
A(XY ) = A(X) ⊗ I + I ⊗ A(Y ).
It can be defined combinatorially as follows. Its vertex set is V (XY ) = V (X) × V (Y ),
and (u1 , v1 ) ∼ (u2 , v2 ) if and only if either u1 = u2 and v1 v2 ∈ E(Y ), or v1 = v2 and
u1 u2 ∈ E(X). Thus A(XY ) and A(Y X) define the same graph.
59

4.1.1 Theorem (Christandl et al. [20]). If X and Y are graphs, then, for all t, we have
UXY (t) = UX (t) ⊗ UY (t).

(4.1)

We will later present a proof of Theorem 4.1.1, but note that it implies the following
corollary trivially.
4.1.2 Corollary. For graphs X and Y , the graph XY admits perfect state transfer at
time τ if and only if either of the graphs admits perfect state transfer at time τ , and if only
one of them does, the other must contain a vertex which is periodic at time τ .
When we introduced the spectral decomposition of a matrix, we assumed the projectors
Er represent projections onto the eigenspaces, and therefore their ranks are equal to the
multiplicity of the corresponding eigenvalues. Now we consider a refinement of such a
decomposition. If M is a symmetric m × m matrix, M admits a decomposition into rank-1
orthogonal projectors
M=

m−1
X

θr Er .

(4.2)

r=0

Here we are no longer requiring that θr 6= θs if r 6= s. Note that if {v0 , ..., vm−1 } forms an
orthonormal basis of eigenvectors of M , then we can choose Er = vr vTr .
For the lemmas below, suppose X is such that A(X) = B ⊗ C + M ⊗ N . We require
B and M to be m × m matrices, and C and N to be n × n matrices. Because of that, we
identify the rows and columns of B and M , similarly for C and N . A typical vertex of X
will be represented as (w, u), where w indexes a row of B and M , and u a row of C and N .
Further to that, suppose that B and M commute. Let β0 ≥ ... ≥ βm−1 and µ0 ≥ ... ≥ µm−1
be the spectra of B and M respectively, and γ0 ≥ ... ≥ γn−1 and ν0 ≥ ... ≥ νn−1 be the
spectra of C and N respectively.
4.1.3 Lemma. Suppose X is as above. Then UX (t) is similar to a block diagonal matrix
with m blocks, in which each block is of the form exp(itLr ), with
Lr = βr C + µr N.
60

Proof. By Theorem 2.1.8, and because B and M are symmetric and commute, there exists
an orthogonal matrix P such that P T BP and P T M P are diagonal. Hence we have that
L = (P T ⊗ I) (B ⊗ C + M ⊗ N ) (P ⊗ I)
is a block diagonal matrix whose blocks are equal to Lr = βr C + µr N . The result now
follows from the fact that
UL (t) = (P T ⊗ I) UX (t) (P ⊗ I).

In the context of the lemma above, we recall that we can use the terms perfect state
transfer and periodicity with respect to symmetric matrices in general.
4.1.4 Lemma. Suppose X is as above, and let E0 , ..., Em−1 be the rank-1 projectors onto
the common eigenspaces of B and M . Let Lr = βr C + µr N . If the graph X admits perfect
state transfer from (w, u) to (z, v), then
(i) the vertices (column indices) w and z are strongly cospectral in the matrices B and
M ; and
(ii) for all r such that Er w 6= 0; if u = v, the matrix Lr is periodic at u; and if u 6= v,
the matrix Lr admits perfect state transfer from u to v.
Proof. By hypothesis, there exists a time τ and a complex number λ such that
UX (τ )(ew ⊗ eu ) = λ(ez ⊗ ev ).
Let P be the matrix that simultaneously diagonalizes B and M . Hence
(P T ⊗ I)UX (τ )(ew ⊗ eu ) = λ(P T ez ⊗ ev ),
and thus, by Lemma 4.1.3,

eiτ L0


eiτ L2

..

.




eiτ Lm−1


 T
 (P ew ⊗ eu ) = λ(P T ez ⊗ ev ).


61

This is true if and only if, for all r = 0, ..., m − 1,
(eTr P T ew )eiτ Lr eu = (eTr P T ez )λev .
Because the matrices eitLr are all unitary, it follows that, for all r,
(eTr P T ew ) = ±(eTr P T ez ),
and so w and z are strongly cospectral in the matrices B and M ; and also that
eiτ Lr eu = ±λev
for all r such that (eTr P T ew ) 6= 0.
4.1.5 Lemma. Suppose X is as above, and now with the extra assumption that C and N
also commute. Let F0 , ..., Fn−1 be the common rank-1 projectors for C and N . Then
UX (t) =

m−1
n−1
XX

eit(βr γs +µr νs ) Er ⊗ Fs .

r=0 s=0

Proof. Note that
B⊗C +M ⊗N =

m−1
n−1
XX

(βr γs + µr νs )Er ⊗ Fs .

r=0 s=0

From


UX (t) = exp it B ⊗ C + M ⊗ N ,
and the facts that BM = M B and CN = N C, it follows that
UX (t) =

m−1
n−1
XX

eit(βr γs +µr νs ) Er ⊗ Fs .

r=0 s=0

62

4.2

Direct product of graphs

Consider graphs X and Y with respective adjacency matrices A(X) and A(Y ).
Definition. We recall that the direct product of X and Y , denoted by X × Y , is the graph
with adjacency matrix A(X) ⊗ A(Y ).
It can be defined combinatorially as follows. Its vertex set is V (X × Y ) = V (X) × V (Y ),
and (u1 , v1 ) ∼ (u2 , v2 ) if and only if u1 u2 ∈ E(X) and v1 v2 ∈ E(Y ). Thus A(X) ⊗ A(Y )
and A(Y ) ⊗ A(X) define the same graph.
This product is also known in the literature as the weak direct product, the tensor
product, the categorical product, and many other names (see Hammack et al. [46, Chapter
4]). In this section, we study when a direct product of graphs admits perfect state transfer.
As an immediate application, we find more examples of perfect state transfer.
4.2.1 Theorem. Suppose X and Y are graphs, and X × Y admits perfect state transfer
between vertices (w, u) and (z, v). If u = v, then Y is periodic at u. If u 6= v, then Y
admits perfect state transfer between u and v. Likewise, if w = z, then X is periodic at w.
If w 6= z, then X admits perfect state transfer between w and z.
Proof. It is a simple consequence of Lemma 4.1.4 with B = C = O, M = A(X) and
N = A(Y ), or M = A(Y ) and N = A(X).
4.2.2 Lemma. Suppose X and Y are graphs and A(X) admits the spectral decomposition
d
X
A(X) =
θr Er . Then
r=0

UX×Y (t) =

d
X

Er ⊗ UY (θr t).

r=0

Proof. It is a consequence of Lemma 4.1.5 and an easy rearrangement.
Now we will show under which conditions on the factors we can obtain perfect state
transfer on the product.
63

4.2.3 Theorem. Suppose UY (τ )eu = λev , and that the eigenvalues of Y in the support of u
√
are of the form bi ∆u . Suppose w and z are strongly cospectral vertices in X. Then X ⊗ Y
admits perfect state transfer from (w, u) to (z, v) if and only if the following conditions hold.
√
(i) For all θr ∈ Φw , we have θr = tr ∆w , where tr ∈ Z and ∆w is a square-free positive
integer (which could be 1).
(ii) The 2-adic norms of tr are all the same.
(iii) If λ is a primitive n-th root of the unit, then n is even, and there exists an integer m
such that
a) If θr ∈ Φ+
wz , then the odd part of tr is congruent to m modulo n.
n
b) If θr ∈ Φ−
wz , then the odd part of tr is congruent to m + 2 modulo n.

Proof. Let Φw = {θ0 , ..., θd }, and Φu = {ϕ0 , ..., ϕk }. Let h be the gcd of the differences
(ϕ0 − ϕr ) for r = 1, ..., k. Let h = 2e `, with ` an odd integer.
Suppose that perfect state transfer occurs in X × Y between (w, u) and (z, v) at time τ
and phase γ. As a consequence of the fact that A(X × Y ) = A(X) ⊗ A(Y ), the eigenvalues
in the support of (w, u) are of the form θr ϕi , with 0 ≤ r ≤ d and 0 ≤ i ≤ k. In light of
√
Theorem 2.4.3, the eigenvalues θr are either integers or integer multiples of ∆w for some
square-free positive ∆w ∈ Z.
Then, using Lemma 4.2.2, we have
γ(ez ⊗ ev ) = UX⊗Y (τ )(ew ⊗ eu )
=

=

d
X
r=0
d
X

(Er ⊗ UY (θr τ ))(ew ⊗ eu )
Er ew ⊗ UY (θr τ )eu .

r=0

Multiplying both sides by Er ⊗ I, we get that, for σr ∈ {+1, −1},
UY (θr τ )eu = σr γev
64

−
depending on whether θr ∈ Φ+
wz of θr ∈ Φwz . In either case, θr τ is a time for which perfect
state transfer occurs in Y between u and v. Applying Theorem 2.4.4, this implies that

π
θr τ = `r e √
2 .` ∆u

and σr γ = λ`r ,

where `r is an odd integer. Considering θr and θs in the support of w, we will have
`r
θr
= .
θs
`s

(4.3)

Because the integers `r are odd, the 2-adic norm of each tr is the same, proving (ii).
0

To prove condition (iii), suppose we take m0 ∈ {1, ..., n} such that λm = γ. The fact
00
that there is a m00 such that λm = −γ is equivalent to (−1) being a power of λ, which
0
happens if and only if n is even. In that case, if θr ∈ Φ+
wz , then `r ≡ m mod n, and if
n
0
θr ∈ Φ−
wz , then `r ≡ m + 2 mod n. Note that the odd part of tr is an odd multiple `r , which
by Equation 4.3 does not depend on r. Say `0 . So if the integers `r satisfy the congruences
with m0 , so will the odd parts of tr with m = m0 `0 .
Now suppose all three conditions hold. Let tr = 2f .kr , for some f ≥ 0 and odd integers
kr . By Lemma 4.2.2, we have

UX×Y

π
√ √
e+f
2 ` ∆w ∆u


=

d
X


Er ⊗ UY

r=0

π
θr . e+f √ √
2 ` ∆w ∆u


.

Note that

UY

π
θr . e+f √ √
2 ` ∆w ∆u




π
= UY kr e √
2 ` ∆u
 
kr
π
√
= UY
2e ` ∆u


Hence

UX×Y

π
√ √
e+f
2 ` ∆w ∆u



d
X

 
kr
π
√
(ew ⊗ eu ) =
Er ew ⊗ UY
eu
e ∆
2
u
r=0
=

d
X
r=0

65

Er ew ⊗ λkr ev .

kr
kr
If r ∈ Φ+
= λm , and if r ∈ Φ−
= λ−m . If
wz , then condition (iii) implies that λ
wz , then λ
λm = γ, we have


π
√ √
(ew ⊗ eu ) = γ(ez ⊗ ev ),
UX×Y
2e+f ∆w ∆u

as claimed.
Note that if w = z, the theorem above takes the following form.
4.2.4 Corollary. Suppose UY (τ )eu = λev , and that the eigenvalues of Y in the support of
√
u are of the form bi ∆u . Let w ∈ V (X). Then X × Y admits perfect state transfer from
(w, u) to (w, v) if and only if the following conditions hold.
√
(i) For all θr ∈ Φw , we have θr = tr ∆w , where tr ∈ Z and ∆w is a square-free positive
integer (which could be 1).
(ii) The 2-adic norms of tr are all the same.
(iii) If λ is a primitive n-th root of the unit, then there exists an integer m such that the
odd part of the integer tr is congruent to m modulo n.
We draw the reader’s attention to the following fact. The conditions on X of both
results depend very little on Y . In fact, if ϕ0 is the largest eigenvalue of Y and τ is the
time at which perfect state transfer occurs in Y , then the three conditions depend only on
the eigenvalues of X, with the exception of the order of eiϕ0 τ as a root of unity. This fact
can be explored in the following corollary.
4.2.5 Corollary. If X × Y admits perfect state transfer, and if the eigenvalues of Y in the
support of the vertices involved in perfect state transfer are integers or integer multiples of
a square root, then X × Y k admits perfect state transfer for all k ∈ Z+ .
Proof. By Theorem 4.1.1, if Y admits perfect state transfer at minimum time τ , then
so does Y k at the same time. Moreover, if the largest eigenvalue of Y is ϕ0 , then the
largest eigenvalue of Y k is kϕ0 . Hence the order of the phase of state transfer in Y k
66

either decreases or stays the same. If it decreases by an odd factor, nothing changes. If
it decreases by an even factor, then what could happen is that X × Y admits perfect
state transfer between (w, u) and (z, v) and X × Y k admits perfect state transfer between
(w, u, u, ..., u) and (w, v, v, ..., v), and between (z, u, u, ..., u) and (z, v, v, ..., v).
This can be pushed even further.
4.2.6 Corollary. If Y admits perfect state transfer, if the eigenvalues of X and Y are
integers or integer multiples of a square root, and if the 2-adic norm of the integer parts of
the eigenvalues of X are all the same, then there exists a k0 ∈ Z+ such that X ⊗ Y (mk0 )
admits perfect state transfer for all m ≥ 1.
As a consequence, we present new examples of perfect state transfer in simple graphs.
For the cases below, we assume that Y is a graph admitting perfect state transfer between
u and v, and that the eigenvalues of Y in the support of u are either integers or integer
multiples of square roots. All the graphs known in the literature admitting perfect state
transfer are of this form.
Example 6 (Stars). Let Sn represent the graph on n + 1 vertices with degree sequence
(n, 1, 1, ..., 1). The spectrum of Sn is
√ (1)
√ (1)
{ n , 0(n−2) , − n }.
√
√
Let w be the vertex of degree n. The eigenvalue support of w is { n, − n}.
From Corollary 4.2.6, there is a k such that Sn × Y k admits perfect state transfer from
(w, u, u, ..., u) to (w, v, v, ..., v).
Note that k is usually quite small. If Y admits perfect state transfer at time π2 , which
is a rather common situation, then k = 2 will suffice.
Example 7 (Odd eigenvalues). If X is a graph with odd eigenvalues, and w ∈ V (X),
then it follows from Corollary 4.2.6 that there is a k such that X × Y k admits perfect
state transfer from (w, u, u, ..., u) to (w, v, v, ..., v).

67

We can find many graphs with odd eigenvalues among the known distance-regular
graphs. For example, there are 32548 non-isomorphic strongly regular graphs with parameters (36,15,6,6). These graphs have eigenvalues {15, 3, −3}. The tensor product of each
of them with C4 will admit perfect state transfer.

4.3

Other graph products

We list some examples of traditional graph products below. See Hammack et al. [46] for
the combinatorial definitions.
1) The lexicographic product X o Y satisfies
A(X o Y ) = A(X) ⊗ J + I ⊗ A(Y ).
2) The strong graph product X  Y satisfies
A(X  Y ) = A(X) ⊗ [A(Y ) + I] + I ⊗ A(Y ).
3) The modular product X  Y satisfies
A(X  Y ) = A(X) ⊗ [A(Y ) + I] + I ⊗ A(Y ) + A(X) ⊗ A(Y ).
The matrix A(X) commutes with I, and so we can use the technology from Section 4.1
to analyse cases 1) and 2). Our technology could also be applied to study case 3) if we
assume that either X or Y is regular.
For the lexicographic product X o Y , we further suppose that Y and J commute, which
is equivalent to Y being a k-regular graph. If A(X) and A(Y ) admit decompositions into
rank-1 projectors
A(X) =

n−1
X
r=0

θr Er

m−1
X
k
and A(Y ) = J +
ρs Fs ,
m
s=1

68

then it follows from Lemma 4.1.5 that
UXoY (t) =

n−1
X
r=0

m−1
X
1
it(θr m+k)
eitρs Er ⊗ Fs
e
Er ⊗ J +
m
s=1

!
,

and so


eitk
eitk
UXoY (t) = UX (mt) ⊗
J + I ⊗ UY (t) −
J .
m
m

(4.4)

In Ge et al. [31, Lemma 5], sufficient conditions for perfect state transfer in X o Y when Y
is regular are presented. Here we characterize perfect state transfer in this context.
4.3.1 Theorem. Suppose X and Y are graphs, and Y is k-regular on m vertices, m > 1.
Then X o Y admits perfect state transfer from (u, w) to (v, z) at time τ and with phase λ
if and only the conditions below hold.
(i) X is periodic at u at time mτ with a phase γ.
(ii) The vertices w and z are distinct and strongly cospectral in Y .
(iii) The following equality holds γeiτ k = λ.
(iv) For all s ∈ {1, ..., m − 1}, we have eiτ ρs Fs ew = λFs ez .
Proof. By Equation 4.4, UXoY (τ )(eu ⊗ ew ) = λ(ev ⊗ ez ) if and only if
eiτ k
j + eu ⊗ UY (τ )ew = λ(ev ⊗ ez ).
m
This is equivalent to having eu = ev , and to existing a γ such that UX (mτ )eu = γeu and
(UX (mτ ) − I)eu ⊗

(γ − 1) iτ k
e j.
m
This equality above is true if and only if the projections of both sides on each eigenspace
of A(Y ) are equal. For the eigenspaces that do not correspond to the eigenvalue k, the
projections are equal if and only if conditions (ii) and (iv) hold. The projections onto the
eigenspace corresponding to k are equal if and only if
UY (τ )ew = λez −

(γ − 1)eiτ k + eiτ k = λ,
or equivalently γeiτ k = λ.
69

Example 8. Using the result above, we can construct a new example of perfect state
transfer. Consider the lexicographic product K2 o (mK2 ) with m odd. In this case, τ = π2 ,
γ = −1 and λ = −1.
For the strong graph product, we have the following.
P
4.3.2 Proposition. If X and Y are graphs, and A(X) = dr=0 θr Er is the spectral decomposition of A(X) with θr varying among its distinct eigenvalues, we have:
UXY (t) =

d
X

eiθr t Er ⊗ UY ((θr + 1)t).

r=0

Proof. We split the expression for the strong product as
A(X  Y ) = A(X) ⊗ I + I ⊗ A(Y ) + A(X) ⊗ A(Y ),
or even
A(X  Y ) = A(XY ) + A(X × Y ).
Thus
UXY (t) = UXY (t) · UX×Y (t),
and hence, using Lemma 4.2.2 and Theorem 4.1.1,
UXY (t) = UX (t) ⊗ UY (t)

d
 X


Er ⊗ UY (θr t)

r=0

=

d
X

eiθr t Er ⊗ UY ((θr + 1)t).

r=0

The corollary below is an analogous version of Theorem 4.2.1 and it is a straightforward
consequence of Lemma 4.1.4.
P
4.3.3 Corollary. Suppose X and Y are graphs, A(X) = dr=0 θr Er , and X  Y admits
perfect state transfer between vertices (w, u) and (z, v). If u = v, then Y is periodic at u.
If u 6= v, then Y admits perfect state transfer between u and v. Likewise, if w = z, then
X is periodic at w. If w 6= z, then X admits perfect state transfer between w and z.
70

Moreover, analogous results to Theorem 4.2.3 and Corollary 4.2.4 could be written in
this case, but with more complicated expressions.

4.4

Double-covers and switching graphs

Definition. Given graphs X and Y on the same set of vertices, we define the graph X n Y
as the graph with adjacency matrix
!
A(X) A(Y )
A(X n Y ) =
.
A(Y ) A(X)
If A(X) ◦ A(Y ) = O, then X n Y is a double cover of the graph with adjacency matrix
A(X) + A(Y ). When A(Y ) = J − I − A(X), then X n Y is a double cover of the complete
graph and is known in the literature as the switching graph of X (see Godsil and Royle
[42, Chapter 11]).
If X is the empty graph, then X n Y = A(K2 ) ⊗ A(Y ) is the bipartite double of Y .
We studied perfect state transfer on bipartite doubles of graphs belonging to association
schemes in Section 3.3. Here we intend to study X n Y in a more general form.
Note that I2 and A(K2 ) commute, and can be simultaneously diagonalized by
!
1 1
1
H=√
.
2 1 −1
Using Lemma 4.1.3, we have the following lemma.
4.4.1 Lemma. Given graphs X and Y , with A = A(X) and B = A(Y ), we have, for all
t,
!
UA+B (t)
0
(H ⊗ I)UXnY (t)(H ⊗ I) =
.
0
UA−B (t)
4.4.2 Theorem. Given graphs X and Y on the same vertex set V , with A = A(X) and
B = A(Y ), the graph X n Y on vertex set {0, 1} × V admits perfect state transfer if and
only if, for some τ ∈ R+ and u ∈ V ,
λ = [UA+B (τ )]u,u = −[UA−B (τ )]u,u
71

and

|λ| = 1.

In that case, perfect state transfer is between (0, u) and (1, u).
Proof. From Lemma 4.4.1, it follows that
1
UXnY (t) =
2

UA+B (t) + UA−B (t) UA+B (t) − UA−B (t)
UA+B (t) − UA−B (t) UA+B (t) + UA−B (t)

!
.

For any u ∈ V , if perfect state transfer happens at τ between (0, u) and some other vertex,
then [UA+B (τ ) + UA−B (τ )]u,u = 0. Hence
λ = [UA+B (τ )]u,u = −[UA−B (τ )]u,u .
This implies that the u-th diagonal entry of UA+B (t) − UA−B (t) is non-zero. It will be a
complex number of order 1 if and only if |λ| = 1.
4.4.3 Corollary. Let θ0 > ... > θd be the eigenvalues of A(X) − A(X). Suppose |V (X)| =
n > 2. Then X n X admits perfect state transfer if and only if n is even and for all θr in
the support of a vertex u, the number (θr + 1) is an integer, and the 2-adic norm of each
(θr + 1) is always the same.
Proof. Let A = A(X) and B = A(X). Let λ = [UA+B (τ )]u,u . Because A + B = J − I, it
. In that case, λ = e−iτ . Given Lemma 4.4.2,
follows that |λ| = 1 if and only if τ = 2kπ
n
perfect state transfer between (0, u) and (1, u) happens if and only if
eiτ θr = e−iτ
for all θr in the support of u. This is equivalent to the condition in the statement.
If A = A(X) and B = A(Y ) commute, then UA±B (t) = UA (t)UB (±t), and we have the
easy characterization of perfect state transfer in A n Y below.
4.4.4 Corollary. Suppose A = A(X) and B = A(Y ) commute. Then perfect state transfer
happens in X n Y between (0, u) and (1, u) if and only if there is a time τ such that X is
periodic at u at time τ , and Y is periodic at u at time τ and with phase ±i.
We use the corollary above to show some new examples of perfect state transfer.
72

Example 9 (Switching graphs). The graph Kn Kn is a strongly regular graph with
parameters (n2 , 2n − 2, n − 2, 2). Its eigenvalues are {2n − 2, n − 2, −2}, hence for all n
divisible by 4, it follows from Corollary 4.4.4 that the switching graph of Kn Kn admits
perfect state transfer at time π2 .
There are two feasible parameter sets for strongly regular graphs on 96 vertices for which
constructions of such graphs are known (see [15]). The parameter sets are (96, 20, 4, 4) and
(96, 76, 60, 60). One example for the first set is the point-graph of the generalized quadrangle GQ(5,3). The switching graphs of all strongly regular graphs with such parameters
admit perfect state transfer.

73

Chapter 5
Translation graphs
This chapter is motivated by the following problem of characterizing which translation
graphs1 admit perfect state transfer, which we are quite far from solving.
We examine the work of Godsil and others on cubelike graphs, and the work of Bašić
and others on circulant graphs. In the former case, perfect state transfer on cubelike graphs
at time π2 was fully characterized, thus our aim is to find more explicit results on perfect
state transfer at shorter times, particularly at times less than π4 . Our main contribution
in this section is the observation that perfect state transfer at shorter times is related
to the concept of uniform mixing in quantum walks. In the latter, even though perfect
state transfer is fully characterized for circulant graphs, we examine the problem using a
different technique. Our immediate goal is to find simpler proofs of known results, but
we were only able to compute the time at which perfect state transfer occurs in a more
explicit way than was originally done. These two sections are motivated by our wish to
find a characterization of perfect state transfer on translation graphs.
1

Cayley graphs for abelian groups.

74

5.1

Cubelike graphs

Definition. Given a group G and a subset C closed under taking the inverse operation,
the (undirected) Cayley Graph Cay(G, C) is the graph whose vertices are the elements of
G, and two distinct vertices are adjacent if and only if their group difference is contained
in C. The subset C is called the connection set of the Cayley Graph.
Definition. A graph X is called a cubelike graph if X is a Cayley Graph for the group Zd2 .
Definition. A (multiplicative complex) character χ of a group G is a homomorphism from
G to the multiplicative group of complex numbers.
The set of all characters of a group forms the group Hom(G, C∗ ). If G is finite, then
the image of any character χ(G) lies in the unit circle, and in the case where G = Zd2 , we
have that χ(g) = ±1 for all characters χ and all g ∈ G.
If X = Cay(G, C) is a Cayley Graph for a finite abelian group G and χ is a character,
P
let χ(C) = g∈C χ(g), and note that we can see χ as a vector χ ∈ C|G| . Then
A(X) χ = χ(C) χ.
It is not difficult to see that every cyclic group is isomorphic to its group of characters,
and because every finite abelian group is isomorphic to a direct sum of cyclic groups, it
follows that finite abelian groups of order n are isomorphic to their character groups. In
particular, there are precisely n distinct characters, and each one of them is an eigenvector
for A(X). It is well known that the set of n characters of a finite abelian group G of order n
is linearly independent, and so they are precisely the eigenvectors of A(X) for any Cayley
Graph X on G.
We can express the characters of Zd2 explicitly by fixing a ∈ Zd2 and setting, for all
x ∈ Zd2 ,
T
χa (x) = (−1)a x .
We now assume henceforth that G = Zd2 , and C ⊂ G. Our goal is to determine when
X = Cay(G, C) admits perfect state transfer, preferably in terms of a simple description
75

of C. Note that X is connected if and only if C generates G, a situation that we assume
hereupon. Due to the structure of G, that is equivalent to C containing a basis for G
seen as a vector space over Z2 . Moreover, C is a basis if and only if X is isomorphic to
the d-dimensional cube. So the maximum diameter of X is d, and the number of distinct
eigenvalues is at least equal to d + 1.
Godsil et al. [9] and Godsil and Cheung [18] have studied perfect state transfer in
cubelike graphs. We summarize below part of their findings.
5.1.1 Theorem (Godsil and Cheung [18], Theorem 2.3). Suppose X = Cay(Zd2 , C). Let
P
w = g∈C g. Let Pw = A(Cay(Zd2 , {w}). Then
π
= i|C| Pw .
UA
2
P
5.1.2 Corollary. Suppose X = Cay(Zd2 , C). Let w = g∈C g. If w 6= 0, then X admits
perfect state transfer between vertices u and u + w at time π2 for all u ∈ V (X).
P
When g∈C g = 0, the situation is more delicate. The connection set of any cubelike
graph determines a matrix M whose columns are the vectors in the connection set C. A
matrix M whose columns are vectors over Z2 determines a binary linear code, which we
will refer to as C. Its codewords are the vectors in the row-space of M . The weight of a
codeword c ∈ C is the number of entries which are not zero, and is denoted by wt(c).
f be the lift of the matrix M to Z. Let ∆ be the gcd of the entries of M
fj, or
Let M
equivalently the gcd of the weights of the rows of M . We say that the centre of C is the
1f
projection onto Z2 of the vector M
j.
∆
The following result generalizes the theorem above, and deals with the case where
P
g∈C g = 0.
5.1.3 Theorem (Godsil and Cheung [18], Theorem 4.1 and Corollary 4.2). Let X be a
cubelike graph in Zd2 with associated matrix M and code C. Let ∆ be the gcd of the weights
of the rows of M . The following are equivalent.
(i) There is some w ∈ Zd2 such that perfect state transfer occurs from u to u + w at time
π
for all u ∈ V (X).
2∆
76

(ii) All codewords of C have weight divisible by ∆, and, for all a ∈ Zd2 , there is a w ∈ Zd2
such that
1
wt(aT M ) ≡ aT w (mod 2).
∆
(iii) ∆ divides | supp(a) ∩ supp(b)| for any two codewords a and b.
If any of the cases hold, then w must be the centre of the code.
The theorem above presents a characterization of perfect state transfer in cubelike
P
graphs. However, to check whether a cubelike graph (Zd2 , C) with
g∈C g = 0 admits
perfect state transfer one needs to examine all codewords of the code associated to the
graph. We also cannot use the theorem to construct cubelike graphs admitting perfect
state transfer at arbitrarily small times, despite the existence of these examples as observed
by Chan in [17].
We would like to accomplish some success in either of the problems mentioned above.
In the direction of the first problem, we present the preliminary results below.
Definition. A complex matrix M is called flat if the absolute value of each of its entries
is constant.
Definition. We say that a graph X with adjacency matrix A admits (instantaneous)
uniform mixing at time τ if UA (τ ) is a flat complex matrix.
The study of uniform mixing has been the topic of a good number of recent papers,
see for instance [60], [32], [1], [2], [16], and [41]. In the context of cubelike graphs, it was
studied by Chan in [17]. Here we will show that uniform mixing in cubelike graphs is
intimately related to perfect state transfer.
Because non-singular linear endomorphisms of Zn2 are automorphisms of the graph,
every (connected) cubelike graph is isomorphic to a cubelike graph whose set of generators
contains the standard basis of Zd2 , which we denote by β = {f1 , ..., fd }. We say that these
graphs are in standard form.
5.1.4 Theorem. Let X = Cay(Zd2 , C) be a cubelike graph in standard form, that is, C =
P
β ∪ C 0 . If X admits perfect state transfer and g∈C g = 0, then the following conditions
hold.
77

(a) X 0 = Cay(Zd2 , C 0 ) admits uniform mixing at time π4 .
(b) |C 0 | ≥ d.
Proof. Let B be the adjacency matrix of Cay(Zd2 , β) and C be that of Cay(Zd2 , C 0 ). Note
that A(X) = B + C, and B and C are commuting matrices. Hence
UA (t) = UB (t)UC (t),

and so UC (t) = UA (t)UB (t).

From Theorem 5.1.1, it follows that if perfect state transfer happens in X, it must be at

time π4 or smaller. Hence UA π4 is a multiple of a permutation matrix which either is the

identity or has order two and no fixed points. On the other hand, UB π4 is a flat complex

matrix. Thus UC π4 is flat. If X 0 were disconnected, then UC (t) would be a diagonal
block matrix with at least two blocks. As a consequence the graph X 0 is connected, so
|C 0 | ≥ d.
We finish this section with an application of the method we developed in Chapter 4.
Recall that we denote Pw = A(Cay(Zd2 , {w}).
5.1.5 Theorem. Let X = Cay(Zd2 , C), A = A(X). Let C 0 ⊂ C be the set containing the
elements of C which are non-zero in the i-th entry, with 1 ≤ i ≤ d. Let C be the adjacency
P
matrix of Cay(Zd2 , C 0 ). Suppose also that g∈C g = 0. Suppose finally that X admits perfect
state transfer at time τ = 2πα with α > 1, and so UA (τ ) is a multiple of Pw for some w.
Then
a) UC (2τ ) = (−1)hei ,wi I.
b)

P

g∈C 0 g = 0.

c) If α > 2, then |C 0 | ≡ 0 (mod 4).
d) If α = 2, then |C 0 | ≡ 0 (mod 4) if hei , wi = 0, and ≡ 2 (mod 4) if hei , wi = 1.
Proof. Suppose without loss of generality that i = 1. Then, for some matrix B,
A = I2 ⊗ B + A(K2 ) ⊗ C.
78

As a consequence, if H = √12

!
1 1
,
1 −1

(H ⊗ I)A(X)(H ⊗ I) =

B+C
0
0
B−C

(H ⊗ I)UA (H ⊗ I) =

UB UC
0
0
UB UC−1

and so we have

!
,

!
.

By hypothesis, UA (τ ) = Pw , and so
(H ⊗ I)Pw =

UB (τ )UC (τ )
0
0
UB (τ )UC (τ )−1

!
(H ⊗ I).

If he1 , wi = 0, this is equivalent to
!

Pw =

UB (τ )UC (τ )
0
0
UB (τ )UC (τ )−1

!

Pw+e1 =

0
UB (τ )UC (τ )
−1
UB (τ )UC (τ )
0

and
,

and so UC (τ ) = UC (τ )−1 , implying that UC (2τ ) = I. Otherwise he1 , wi = 1, and we have
!
0
UB (τ )UC (τ )
Pw =
and
−UB (τ )UC (τ )−1
0
!
UB (τ )UC (τ )
0
Pw+e1 =
,
0
−UB (τ )UC (τ )−1
thus UC (τ ) = −UC (τ )−1 , and UC (2τ ) = −I.


In any case, UC π2 is a multiple of the identity. In view of Theorem 5.1.1, UC π2 =
P
0
i|C | Pq where q = g∈C 0 g. Because Pq = I, then q = 0. Thus |C 0 | ≡ 0 (mod 4), unless
2τ = π2 and he1 , wi = 1, in which case |C 0 | ≡ 2 (mod 4).

79

5.2

Circulant graphs

In this short section, we comment on the problem of characterizing perfect state transfer
in another class of Cayley graphs.
Definition. A graph X is called a circulant graph if it is a Cayley graph for Zn for some
n ∈ N.
In a sequence of papers ([7], [62], [8]), Bašić and others fully characterized when circulant graphs admit perfect state transfer. We introduce some notation. Let
Gn (d) = {k : gcd(k, n) = d}.
The following result is a corollary of a more general result due to Bridges and Mena [12,
Theorem 2.4].
5.2.1 Theorem. A circulant graph for Zn with connection set C has an integral spectrum
if and only if, for some set D of proper divisors of n,
[
C=
Gn (d).
d∈D

Given a set D of proper divisors of n, we define
Di = {d ∈ D :
We also denote Di∗ = Di \

n
2i

n
= 2−i }.
d 2

.

5.2.2 Theorem (Bašić [8], Theorem 22). A (connected) circulant graph X = Cay(Zn , C)
on more than 2 vertices admits perfect state transfer if and only if all of the following
conditions hold.
(i) X has integral spectrum, and so there is a subset D of proper divisors of n such that
S
C = d∈D Gn (d).
(ii) n is a multiple of 4.
80

(iii) Either n2 or n4 belongs to C, but not both.
(iv) 2D2∗ = D1∗ .
(v) 4D2∗ = D0 .
The proof available for the result above is split into several steps and relies on some
theory about Ramanujan’s sums. We would like to see a more direct proof of the result. It
is also neither stated in the paper nor explicit in the original proof at which time perfect
state transfer occurs. For that, we offer the contribution below.
Let ωn denote a primitive n-th root of unity, and define for all j ∈ {0, ..., (n − 1)},
vj = (1 ωnj ωn2j . . . ωn(n−1)j ).
For any circulant graph on Zn with connection set C, the set {v0 , ..., vn−1 } is a basis of
orthogonal eigenvectors, and the eigenvalue corresponding to vj is
X
λj =
ωnsj .
g∈C



We also denote Ca = g ∈ C : |g|2 = 21a , and C≥a = g ∈ C : |g|2 ≤ 21a .
5.2.3 Lemma. Let n = 2e f . Then for any q ∈ {1, ..., e},
λ 2nq = |C≥q | − |Cq−1 |,
and consequently
λ0 − λf =

e−2
X

|Ca | + 2|Ce−1 |.

a=0

Proof. First note that
λ 2nq =

X

ω2gq .

g∈C

Suppose e = 1. Note that ω2g = (−1)g (seeing g ∈ Z), and so
λ n2 = |C≥1 | − |C0 |,
81

hence
λ0 − λ n2 = 2|C0 |.
Suppose e > 1. Suppose g ∈ C, and the power of 2 dividing g is smaller than q − 1. Let
n
+ g. Then
g 0 = 2e−q+1
gcd (g, g 0 ) = g,
and so because the graph has integer eigenvalues, it follows that g 0 ∈ C. Note that
ωng2

e−q f

0 e−q f

= −ωng 2

,

thus
X

gn

ωn 2q = |C≥q | − |Cq−1 |.

g∈C

We believe the following theorem might be a first step towards an elementary proof of
Theorem 5.2.2, but its importance at this point is that it determines at which time perfect
state transfer happens in circulant graphs.
5.2.4 Theorem. Suppose n = 2e f , with e ≥ 2. Suppose perfect state transfer happens in
X at time τ . Then τ = π2 if and only if n4 ∈ C and n2 ∈
/ C, or n4 ∈
/ C and n2 ∈ C. Using
Theorem 5.2.2, this means that perfect state transfer in circulants always happens at time
τ = π2 .
Proof. Let g ∈ C be such that the power of 2 in the factorization of g is smaller than e − 1.

It follows that for g 0 ∈ n2 − g, n2 + g, n − g ,
gcd(g, g 0 ) = g.

Because the eigenvalues are integers, n2 − g, n2 + g, n − g ⊂ C. Hence |Ca | ≡ 0 (mod 4)
for all a ≤ e − 2. From Lemma 5.2.3, it follows that |{ n2 , n4 } ∩ C| = 1 if and only if
λ0 − λf ≡ 2

(mod 4),

but from Theorem 2.4.4, this is equivalent to τ = π2 .
82

Chapter 6
Orthogonal polynomials and
spectrally extremal graphs
In this chapter, we study the relation between certain orthogonal polynomials and perfect
state transfer. First, we introduce an inner product in the space of polynomials that depends on the adjacency matrix of the graph. These polynomials evaluated on the adjacency
matrix of the graph yield an orthogonal basis of matrices. We will cover basic properties
of these polynomials and matrices. Even though this is a well established theory, we offer
an original observation in Corollary 6.1.3.
Following this, we relate the orthogonal basis of matrices to the distance matrices of
the graph. In the case where the graph is distance-regular, these matrices coincide, but
in general they are very different. However, if the graph is extremal with respect to the
known bound on the number of eigenvalues given by the diameter plus one, then the work
of Fiol, Garriga and others provides a vast literature about the relation between orthogonal
polynomials and distance matrices (see for instance [29], [24], [57] and [65]).
Finally, we relate all these concepts to perfect state transfer. More specifically, we
show how we can find strongly cospectral vertices in certain cases, and then show which
conditions on the parity of the eigenvalues are needed to attain perfect state transfer. The
relation between graphs of diameter d with d + 1 eigenvalues and perfect state transfer is
83

considered in Bu et al. [68]. Our approach is nevertheless more general and with deeper
consequences. In this section we will also provide an elementary proof of Lemma 3.2.2.

6.1

Orthogonal polynomials and matrices

We refer to Godsil [36, Chapter 8] for most of the results in this section.
Let Pd be the vector space of polynomials with real coefficients and degree at most d.
6.1.1 Theorem. If h , i is an inner product of Pd satisfying hxp(x), q(x)i = hp(x), xq(x)i
for all p and q, and if p0 , p1 , ..., pd is a sequence of orthogonal polynomials obtained after
applying the Gram-Schmidt algorithm to x0 , x1 , ..., xd , then the following holds.
(i) pr is the unique polynomial up to multiplication by scalar which is orthogonal to p0 ,
p1 ,...,pr−1 .
(ii) There are coefficients {ar , br , cr }dr=0 such that, for all r ∈ {0, ..., d},
xpr (x) = cr+1 pr+1 (x) + ar pr (x) + br−1 pr−1 (x),

(6.1)

with the conventions that b−1 = cd+1 = 0.
(iii) The zeros of each polynomial are real and simple. Moreover, the zeros of pr interlace
those of pr+1 for all r.
Proof. Item (i) is a simple consequence of a dimension argument. For (ii), note that, for
all r, the polynomial xpr−2 (x) is a linear combination of polynomials with degree at most
r − 1, and hence
hxpr (x), pr−2 (x)i = hpr (x), xpr−2 (x)i = 0.
Hence xpr (x) is a linear combination of pr+1 , pr and pr−1 for all r.
For (iii), suppose without loss of generality that the leading coefficient of all polynomials
is positive, and so cr > 0 for all r. Note that (ii) implies that
br−1 =

cr hpr , pr i
,
hpr−1 , pr−1 i
84

 0
p0
p1

< 0 for all x (including the value −∞ at certain limits

0
pr−1
where it is not defined). Suppose that
< 0. Reorganizing Equation 6.1, we get
pr

and so br > 0 for all r. Now,

pr+1 (x)
pr−1 (x)
= x − ar − br−1
,
pr (x)
pr (x)

0
pr
and so by induction, for all r, we have
< 0. As a consequence,
pr+1
cr+1

p0r pr+1 − pr p0r+1 < 0.

(6.2)

Suppose by induction that all zeros of pr are all real and simple. So the derivative of pr
changes signs between any two of its consecutive zeros, thus Equation 6.2 implies that pr+1
has an odd number of real zeros between them. Moreover, these polynomials have positive
leading coefficients, so pr+1 is negative at the largest zero of pr , thus it must have a zero
which is larger than the zeros of pr , and likewise, a zero which is smaller. As a consequence,
all zeros of pr+1 are real, simple, and are interlaced by those of pr .
There are many inner products of polynomials, but here we focus on a seemingly boring
case. In the vector space of square matrices with complex entries, the product
hA, Bi = tr(AB ∗ )
is an inner product, which we will refer to as the trace product, and so we have the following
definition.
Definition. Given a symmetric matrix A whose minimal polynomial has degree d + 1, we
define an inner product h , iA in the space of polynomials of degree at most d by
hp(x), q(x)iA = tr(p(A)q(A)).
We will omit the subscript A whenever it is determined by the context.
Given a symmetric matrix A whose minimal polynomial has degree d+1, and according
to the inner product defined above, we can obtain a sequence of orthogonal polynomials
85

(p0 , ..., pd ) of increasing degree by applying the Gram-Schmidt procedure to (x0 , ..., xd ).
Note in particular that p1 (x) = αx for some constant α.
As a consequence, the vector space h{Ak }k≥0 i admits two very distinct orthogonal bases
of matrices with respect to the trace product. One is formed by the orthogonal projections
onto the eigenspaces of A. They satisfy Er Es = O if r 6= s, and so trivially
tr(Er Es ) = 0.
The other basis is {p0 (A), ..., pd (A)}, which is an orthogonal basis by definition of the
polynomials. These two bases are very different. For example, each projector Er is a
polynomial of degree d evaluated at A.
We finish this section with a useful observation. It is a generalization of the Koppinen
identity for the Bose-Mesner algebra of an association scheme (see [56]).
6.1.2 Theorem. Let A be a vector space of square matrices of order n with complex
entries, and let {A0 , ..., Ad } and {B0 , ..., Bd } be two orthogonal bases with respect to the
trace product. Then
d
X
1
1
∗
Ar ⊗ Ar =
Br ⊗ Br∗ .
∗
∗
tr(Ar Ar )
tr(Br Br )
r=0
r=0

d
X

2

Proof. Consider the canonical isomorphism ϕ : Cn×n → Cn that maps the matrix which
is 1 at the position (i, j) and 0 elsewhere to the vector ei+(j−1)n . Note that
tr(AB ∗ ) = ϕ(B)∗ ϕ(A),
and so {ϕ(A0 ), ..., ϕ(Ad )} and {ϕ(B0 ), ..., ϕ(Bd )} are orthogonal bases of ϕ(A) with respect
to the canonical inner product. For any orthogonal basis {v0 , ..., vd } of ϕ(A), the known
formula for the orthogonal projection onto ϕ(A) is
projϕ(A) =

d
X

1

v∗ v
r=0 r r

vr v∗r ,

and hence
d
X

d
X
1
1
∗
ϕ(Ar )ϕ(Ar ) =
ϕ(Br )ϕ(Br )∗ .
∗
∗ ϕ(B )
ϕ(A
)
ϕ(A
)
ϕ(B
)
r
r
r
r
r=0
r=0

86

A simple reorganization of the terms on these n2 × n2 matrices yields the result.
Recall that if E is an orthogonal projection onto a subspace S, then
tr E = dim S.
If X is a graph with distinct eigenvalues {θ0 , ..., θd }, we typically denote the multiplicity
of θr by mr .
6.1.3 Corollary. Let X be a graph and {E0 , ..., Ed } be the orthogonal projections onto the
eigenspaces of A = A(X). Let (p0 (x), ..., pd (x)) be a sequence of polynomials of increasing
degree, orthogonal with respect to trace product. Then
d
X
1
r=0

6.2

mr

Er ⊗ Er =

d
X

1
p (A) ⊗ pr (A).
2) r
tr(p
(A)
r
r=0

Distance matrices and equitable partitions

If X is a distance-regular graph of diameter d, then the distance matrices {A0 , A, A2 , ..., Ad }
form an association scheme, and it follows from the definition of the intersection array of
X that (see Equation 3.2)
AAi = bi−1 Ai−1 + ai Ai + ci+1 Ai+1 .
As a consequence, the matrix Ai can be written as a polynomial of degree i on A, say pi .
Note that
tr(Ai Aj ) = sum of all entries of (Ai ◦ Aj ),
and hence the polynomials (p0 , ..., pd ) form a sequence of polynomials of increasing degree
satisfying tr(pi (A)pj (A)) = 0 if i 6= j. They are the orthogonal polynomials obtained from
applying Gram-Schmidt to the sequence (x0 , ..., xd ). It turns out that distance-regular
graphs are characterized by this property (see Fiol [28]).
We will now study the relation between orthogonal polynomials and distance-regularity
through a local perspective.
87

Definition. Suppose π = (C1 , ..., Ck ) is a partition of V (X). We say that π is an equitable
partition if the number of edges from a vertex u ∈ Ci to a cell Cj depends only on i and
j, say c(i, j). The numbers c(i, j) are called the parameters of the partition.
6.2.1 Lemma (Godsil [36], Chapter 5, Lemma 3.1). If the distance partition relative to
u ∈ V (X) is equitable, the number of closed walks on u of any length depends only on the
parameters of the partition.
By induction on the length of a walk, we have the following corollary.
6.2.2 Lemma. If the distance partitions of vertices u and v are equitable, and if u and v
are cospectral vertices, then the parameters of their partitions are equal.
It follows trivially from the definitions that a graph is distance-regular if and only if the
distance partition relative to each vertex is equitable and the parameters do not depend
on the chosen vertex. This can be strengthened by the following theorem.
6.2.3 Theorem (Godsil and Shawe-Taylor [43], Theorem 2.2). If X is regular and the
distance partition relative to each vertex is equitable, then X is distance-regular.
We introduce some definitions below.
Definition. Given a vertex u ∈ V (X), the maximum distance between u and any vertex
of X is called the eccentricity of u and will be denoted by εu . We also define the dual
degree of u as d∗u = |Φu | − 1. Finally, the walk module of u is the subspace
Wu = h{Ak eu }k≥0 i.
It follows that
Wu = h{Er eu }θr ∈Φu i,
u
and because the vectors {Ak eu }εk=0
are all independent, we have that

εu ≤ d∗u .
If equality is met above, we say that u is a spectrally extremal vertex.
88

(6.3)

Definition. Let X be a graph, A = A(X), and u ∈ V (X). We define the u-th local inner
product in the space of polynomials of degree at most d∗u by
hp, qiu = eTu p(A)q(A)eu .
In terms of this inner product, equitable distance partitions can be characterized as
follows.
6.2.4 Proposition. Let (p0 , ..., pd∗ ) be a sequence of orthogonal polynomials of increasing
degree with respect to the u-th local inner product. The distance partition relative to u is
equitable if and only if pr (A)eu is a 01-vector (up to scalar) whose support consists precisely
of the vertices at distance r from u. In particular, u is spectrally extremal.
Proof. The key property of orthogonal polynomials useful for this proposition is the three
term recurrence (Equation 6.1) from Theorem 6.1.1
Apr (A)eu = cr+1 pr+1 (A)eu + ar pr (A)eu + br−1 pr−1 (A)eu .
If the extra hypothesis on the polynomials is true, the equation above says precisely that
the number of neighbours in pr (A)eu of any vertex in each of the sets pr+1 (A)eu , pr (A)eu
and pr−1 (A)eu does not depend on the choice of the vertex. Thus the distance partition
relative to u is equitable.
Conversely, start by noting that p0 (A) = I and p1 (A) = A. Now suppose by induction
that for all k ≤ r, the vector pk (A)eu is a 01-vector whose support consists precisely of the
vertices at distance k from u. Because the distance partition of u is equitable, Apr (A)eu is
constant on the vertices at a fixed distance from u, and its support is confined to vertices
at distance (r − 1), r and (r + 1) from u. By induction, orthogonality, and the three term
recurrence, pr+1 (A)eu is a vector constant on the vertices at distance r + 1 from u, and 0
elsewhere.
For regular graphs, this result can be significantly strengthened.
6.2.5 Theorem (Fiol, Garriga and Yebra [30], Theorem 6.3). If the distance partition
relative to a vertex u is equitable, then u is spectrally extremal and there exists a polynomial
p(x) such that p(A)eu is a 01-vector whose support are the vertices at distance d∗u from u.
If the graph is regular, then the converse holds.
89

6.3

Spectrally extremal vertices and quantum walks

In this section, we focus on the case where a graph contains spectrally extremal vertices,
and we study when such vertices can be involved in perfect state transfer. More specifically,
we find a characterization of strong cospectrality between spectrally extremal vertices.
6.3.1 Lemma. Let u, v ∈ V (X), with g = d(u, v). Suppose u is a spectrally extremal
vertex. If u and v are strongly cospectral, then the following conditions hold.
(i) If d(u, w) = d(u, v), then w = v.
(ii) If z ∈ V (X), if Φz = Φu and if d(z, w) = d(u, v) for some w ∈ V (X), then
(Ag )z,w ≤ (Ag )u,v . Equality occurs if and only if z and w are also strongly cospectral.
Proof. Suppose Φu = {θ0 , θ1 , ...., θd∗ }. For all r ∈ {0, ..., d∗ }, let σr ∈ {+1, −1} be such
that
Er ev = σr Er eu .
Let p(x) be the polynomial of minimum degree satisfying p(θr ) = σr for all r. Then it
follows that
p(A)eu = ev .
Because εu = d∗ , the vector p(A)eu must be non-zero on the entries corresponding to
vertices whose distance to u is the degree of p(x). Hence deg p(x) = g, and v is the unique
vertex at distance g from u.
To see (ii), first note that hp(A)ez , p(A)ez i = 1, so the absolute value of each entry in
p(A)ez is at most 1. Let p(x) = ag xg + ... + a0 . Then p(A)eu = ev implies that
ag =

1
(Ag )u,v

,

and thus
1 ≥ |p(A)z,w | = ag (Ag )z,w =

90

(Ag )z,w
.
(Ag )u,v

6.3.2 Lemma. Let u, v ∈ V (X). The following are equivalent.
(i) Vertices u and v are cospectral, and there exists a polynomial p(x) such that p(A)eu = ev .
(ii) The vertices u and v are strongly cospectral.
Moreover, if u and v are cospectral, then any polynomial satisfying p(A)eu = ev is such
that p(A)ev = eu and p(θr ) = ±1 for all θr ∈ Φu .
Proof. The implication (ii) =⇒ (i) is trivial. To see the converse, let p(x) be a polynomial
satisfying p(A)eu = ev . Because p(A) is a symmetric matrix, it follows that (p(A)2 )u,u = 1.
Vertices u and v are cospectral, so Theorem 2.5.1 implies that (p(A)2 )v,v = 1. Thus p(A)ev
is a unitary vector, but p(A)u,v = 1, implying that p(A)ev = eu . As a consequence,
p(A)2 eu = eu , and so if θr ∈ Φu , it follows that p(θr ) = ±1. This shows that u and v are
strongly cospectral.
Here we introduce a definition. We say that u and v are (a pair of) antipodal vertices
if the distance partition of u is equitable, {v} is a singleton in the partition at maximum
distance from u, and the parameters of the partition are symmetric with respect to u and v.
Our use of the word “antipodal” here is consistent with its use in Chapter 3, in particular
note that an antipodal distance-regular graph with classes of size 2 is partitioned into pairs
of antipodal vertices.
6.3.3 Theorem. If u and v are antipodal vertices in X, then u and v are spectrally extremal
vertices and they are strongly cospectral. If X is regular, u is spectrally extremal , u and
v are strongly cospectral, and their distance is equal to their eccentricity, then u and v are
antipodal vertices.
Proof. If u and v are antipodal, then the weaker direction of Theorem 6.2.5 implies that u
is spectrally extremal and that there is a polynomial p(x) such that
p(A)eu = ev .
From Lemma 6.3.2, we have that u and v are strongly cospectral.
91

For the converse, note that it follows from Theorem 6.2.5 that the distance partitions
of u and of v are equitable. To see that the parameters of the partitions are symmetric
with respect to u and v, note that if the vertices are strongly cospectral, then they are
cospectral, and so by Lemma 6.2.2 the vertices u and v are antipodal.
We would like to drop the condition on the theorem above that requires u and v to
be at maximal distance. In other words, we would like to believe that a pair of spectrally
extremal strongly cospectral vertices in a regular graph must be at maximal distance from
each other. For instance, this is true for 2-connected graphs. In particular, Lemma 6.3.1
implies that v is a cut-vertex of X, unless v is at maximal distance from u. If X is
2-connected, it follows that u and v must be at maximal distance.
For graphs which are not 2-connected, we were unable to achieve success in removing
the hypothesis. The following lemma is a step towards this goal, but otherwise our failed
efforts only indicate that it might not be possible. The consequences we derive from the
lemma are nevertheless important.
6.3.4 Lemma. Suppose u is a spectrally extremal vertex of X, and suppose u and v are
strongly cospectral. Let p(x) be the polynomial satisfying p(A)eu = ev , with p(θr ) = σr ∈
{+1, −1} for all θr ∈ Φu . Let X 0 be the component of X\v containing u. Then p(x) is the
minimal polynomial with respect to u in X 0 (up to a constant).
Proof. Let d(u, v) = g and A0 = A(X 0 ). From Lemma 6.3.1 (i), we have that v is the
unique vertex at distance g from u. Note that walks of length g pass by v only if v is its
final vertex, so the entries of p(A)eu relative to vertices at distance at most g − 1 from u
are equal to the respective entries of p(A0 )eu , thus p(A0 )eu = 0. Because the eccentricity
of u in X 0 is g − 1 and p(x) has degree g, it follows that it is the minimal polynomial up
to a constant.
6.3.5 Corollary. Let u, v ∈ V (X). Suppose Φu = {θ0 , ...., θd∗ }, ordered in such a way that
θr > θr+1 for all r. If u and v are spectrally extremal and strongly cospectral, and p(x) is
such that p(A)eu = ev , then there is no index r ∈ {0, ..., d∗ } such that
p(θr ) = p(θr+1 ) = p(θr+2 ).
92

Proof. Suppose otherwise that there is such index, say s. From Lemma 6.3.4, the roots of
p(x) are the eigenvalues of X\v in the support of u. A local version of interlacing implies
that there are no two roots of p(x) between θr and θr+1 for any r, hence p(θs ) = p(θs+1 ) =
p(θs+2 ) implies that there are three roots of the p0 (x) between two of its real roots. This is
a contradiction to the fact that all roots of p(x) are real.
If we know that the pair of strongly cospectral vertices is at maximal distance in a
regular graph, we can actually determine the values of p(θr ) for all r.
6.3.6 Theorem. Let u, v ∈ V (X). Suppose Φu = {θ0 , ...., θd∗ }, ordered in such way that
θr > θr+1 for all r. If u and v are antipodal then, for all r ∈ {0, ..., d∗ },
Er ev = (−1)r Er eu .
If X is regular, then the converse holds.
Proof. Suppose X is regular. Let d = d(u, v), and p(x) the polynomial of degree d such
that p(A)eu = ev . If p(x) is such that p(θr ) = (−1)r , then p(x) has at least d∗ roots,
so d ≥ d∗ , and hence it could only be that d = d∗ . So u and v are spectrally extremal,
strongly cospectral, and at maximal distance. It follows from Theorem 6.3.3 that they are
a pair of antipodal vertices.
Now suppose u and v are antipodal. A simple argument using Lemma 6.3.4 and interlacing will suffice to show this direction, but we provide an elementary proof below.
Let p(x) be the polynomial satisfying p(θr ) = σr ∈ {+1, −1} with p(A)eu = ev , and let
q(x) be the polynomial of minimal degree that satisfies q(θr ) = (−1)r for r ∈ {0, ..., d∗ }.

93

Our goal is to show that σr = (−1)r . We have
1 ≥ |q(A)u,v |
∗

d
X

1
∗
(Ad )u,v
θr − θs
r=0
s6=r
!
d∗
Y 1
X
∗
(Ad )u,v ,
=
(−1)r
θr − θs
r=0
s6=r
!
d∗
X
Y 1
∗
≥
σr
(Ad )u,v
θr − θs
r=0
s6=r
=

(−1)r

Y

because all terms are positive,

= p(A)u,v
= 1.
Note that equality holds throughout if and only if σr = (−1)r , as we wanted.
If a graph X has diameter d, then Equation 6.3 implies that X has at least d + 1
distinct eigenvalues. We say that X is spectrally extremal if equality holds. Note that
every spectrally extremal graph contains at least one pair of spectrally extremal vertices.
6.3.7 Theorem. Suppose X is a spectrally extremal regular graph on n vertices of diameter
d, and that its distinct eigenvalues are θ0 > ... > θd . Suppose u and v are vertices at
distance d. Then u and v are antipodal if and only if
d
Y

d
X
Y 1
1
n
=
(−1)r
.
θ − θs
θr − θs
s=0 0
r=0
s6=r

Proof. Let p(x) be a polynomial such that p(A) = E0 . Because the graph is regular
E0 = (1/n)J, and so if p(x) = ad xd + ... + a0 , it follows that, for all vertices u and v at
distance d,
!−1
d
1 Y 1
d
(A )u,v =
.
n s=0 θ0 − θs
The result now follows from Lemma 6.3.6.
94

6.3.8 Corollary. Suppose X is a spectrally extremal regular graph on n vertices of diameter
d. If the eccentricity of every vertex is d and if
d
Y 1
X
1
=
(−1)r
,
n
θ − θs
θ
r − θs
r=0
s=0 0
s6=r
d
Y

then X is an antipodal distance regular graph.
Proof. It follows from Theorems 6.2.3 and 6.3.7.

6.4

State transfer on spectrally extremal graphs

Now we apply our results to determine which spectrally extremal regular graphs admit
perfect state transfer.
6.4.1 Theorem. Suppose X is regular. Suppose u is a spectrally extremal vertex of X,
and v is a vertex at maximal distance from u. Let Φu = {θ0 , ..., θd∗ }, with θr > θr+1 .
Then X admits perfect state transfer between vertices u and v if and if only if the following
conditions hold.
(i) The eigenvalues in Φu are integers.
(ii) The vertices u and v are antipodal.
(iii) There is an α such that for all odd r, we have |θ0 − θr |2 = 2−α .
(iv) If r is even, then |θ0 − θr |2 < 2−α .
In that case, perfect state transfer happens at time 2πα (or some odd multiple).
Proof. Theorem 2.4.3 implies that the eigenvalues are integers. From Theorem 2.4.2, perfect state transfer implies strong cospectrality. The vertices are at maximal distance from

95

each other, and if they are strongly cospectral, Theorem 6.3.3 says that they are antipodal.
Note that
d∗
X
U (t)eu =
eitθr Er eu .
r=0

Lemma 6.3.6 implies that
∗

eu =

d
X

(−1)r Er ev ,

r=0

therefore perfect state transfer is now equivalent to
eitθ0
= (−1)r ,
eitθr
and this is equivalent to
t(θ0 − θr ) = kr π,
where kr is an integer with the same parity as r. This condition is equivalent to (ii) and
(iii), and also gives the expression for the time.
In the case where X is spectrally extremal, we can say more.
6.4.2 Corollary. Suppose X is a spectrally extremal regular graph of diameter d on n
vertices, having distinct eigenvalues θ0 > ... > θd . Then X admits perfect state transfer
between any pair (u, v) of vertices at distance d if and only if
(i) All eigenvalues are integers.
(ii) There is an α such that for all odd r, we have |θ0 − θr |2 = 2−α .
(iii) If r is even, then |θ0 − θr |2 < 2−α .
(iv) The following equality holds
d
Y

d
X
Y 1
1
n
=
(−1)r
.
θ − θs
θr − θs
s=0 0
r=0
s6=r

Proof. It follows from Theorems 6.3.7 and 6.4.1.
96

Using Theorem 6.3.7 again, we have the following corollary.
6.4.3 Corollary. If X is a spectrally extremal regular graph of diameter d in which the
eccentricity of every vertex is d, and if U (τ ) is a permutation matrix with no fixed points
for some τ , then X is a distance-regular graph.

97

Chapter 7
Bipartite graphs, trees and the
Laplacian matrix
This chapter is motivated by the question as to which trees admit perfect state transfer.
We only have two examples of such trees: the paths P2 and P3 . We realize that many of
our observations generalize to bipartite graphs, and we find necessary conditions for the
existence of perfect state transfer in such case. We were able for instance to show that
trees whose adjacency matrix is invertible do not admit perfect state transfer. The problem
remains open otherwise.
Following this, we introduce some properties of the Laplacian matrix of graphs, focusing on the Laplacian matrix of trees. We then approach for the first time in this thesis
continuous-time quantum walk matrix relative to the Laplacian matrix of a graph. In this
case, the problem is relatively easier, and we will show that eigenvalues in the support
of vertices involved in perfect state transfer must be integers. As a consequence, many
known results about the Laplacian spectrum of a graph can be applied to study perfect
state transfer, and we will explore some of these relations.

98

7.1

Bipartite graphs

Suppose X is a bipartite graph, in which case the adjacency matrix of X can be written
as
!
O B
A(X) =
(7.1)
BT O
for some matrix B of dimension k × `. If v is an eigenvector for A(X), it can be written
as v = (v1 , v2 ), where v1 ∈ Rk and v2 ∈ R` . This partition of the eigenvectors leads to
the following lemma.
7.1.1 Lemma. If θ is an eigenvalue for a bipartite graph X with corresponding eigenvector
(v1 , v2 ), then −θ is an eigenvalue with eigenvector (v1 , −v2 ).
As a consequence, we have the following result.
7.1.2 Lemma. If X is a bipartite graph and u√ ∈ V (X) is a periodic vertex, then no
eigenvalue in the support of u is of the form a+b2 ∆ for non-zero integers a and b with ∆
square-free larger than 1.
√

√

Proof. Suppose θ = a+b2 ∆ is in the support of u. Then its algebraic conjugate θ = a−b2 ∆ is
also in the support, and by the observation above, the values −θ and −θ are also eigenvalues
in the support of u. If τ is the time at which u is periodic, it follows that τ (θ − θ) and
τ (θ − (−θ)) are both even multiples of π, a contradiction.
The following result has been noticed multiple times (see Godsil [35] for more details).
7.1.3 Theorem. If X is a bipartite graph with a unique perfect matching, then A(X) is
invertible and its inverse is an integer matrix. If X is a tree, then A(X) is invertible if
and only if X has a (unique) perfect matching.
As a consequence, we have the following.
7.1.4 Theorem. Except for K2 , no connected bipartite graph with a unique perfect matching contains periodic vertices.
99

Proof. Suppose X is a bipartite graph with a unique perfect matching, and that u is a
periodic vertex. Let θ be an eigenvalue in the support of u, and recall from Theorem 2.4.3
that θ is a quadratic integer. By Theorem
7.1.3, 1θ must be an algebraic integer, and so θ
√
is either +1, −1, or of the form a+b2 ∆ with a and b non-zero. Lemma 7.1.2 excludes the
latter case, and hence the only eigenvalues in the support of u are +1 and −1. It is easy
to see in this case that the connected component containing u is equal to K2 , and so the
result follows.
Note that the corollary below can be used to easily show that no Pn with n even admits
perfect state transfer.
7.1.5 Corollary. Except for K2 , no tree with an invertible adjacency matrix admits perfect
state transfer.
The result above allows us to rule perfect state transfer out of a large class of trees.
We can work a bit more in the case where perfect state transfer happens between vertices
in different classes of the bipartition.
7.1.6 Lemma. If X is a bipartite graph admitting perfect state transfer between u and v,
and if u and v are in different classes, then their support contains only integer eigenvalues.
Proof. We prove by contradiction. From Lemma 7.1.2, we need only to consider the case
√
√
where b ∆ is in the support of u. From Lemma 7.1.1, if (v1 , v2 ) is an eigenvector for b ∆,
√
√
then (v1 , −v2 ) is an eigenvector for −b ∆. Note that −b ∆ is the algebraic conjugate of
√
b ∆ in Q(∆), hence (v1 , −v2 ) is obtained from (v1 , v2 ) by taking the algebraic conjugate
at each entry. As a consequence,
√
(v1 , v2 ) = (v1 , ∆v02 ),
where v1 and v02 are rational vectors. Thus the absolute value of the entries in the u-th
and v-th position are different, and so these vertices cannot be strongly cospectral.
Now recall Equation 7.1, and observe that it implies that
!
√
√
cos(t BB T )
i sin(t BB T )B
√
√
UA (t) =
.
i sin(t B T B)B T
cos(t B T B)
100

As a consequence, if perfect state transfer happens in a bipartite graph between vertices in
different classes, it must happen with phase ±i. We use that to prove the following result.
7.1.7 Theorem. If X is bipartite, perfect state transfer happens between u and v at time
τ and u and v belong to different classes, then the eigenvalues in the support of u have the
same 2-adic norm. In particular, 0 cannot be in the support of u.
Proof. We saw that perfect state transfer must happen in this case with phase ±i. Let θ0
be the largest eigenvalue of the graph. It is in the support of u, and so it is an integer. If
π
. Let θr
|θ0 |2 = 2−α , then it follows from Theorem 2.4.4 that τ is an odd multiple of 2α+1
be an eigenvector in the support of u, and θ−r = −θr .
Because u and v are in different classes (but are strongly cospectral), Er eu = σEr ev
and E−r eu = −σE−r ev with σ = ±1, and so τ (θ0 − σθr ) is an even multiple of π, whereas
τ (θ0 + σθr ) is an odd multiple of π. All together, we have the following three equations:
θ0 ≡ 2α

(mod 2α+1 ),

θ0 − σθr ≡ 0

(mod 2α+2 ),

θ0 + σθr ≡ 2α+1

(mod 2α+2 ).

From that it follows that θr is also congruent to 2α (mod 2α+1 ), and that 0 cannot be
in the support of u.
Conjecture 1. No tree except for P2 and P3 admits perfect state transfer.
We checked in SAGE that no tree with more than three and less than 11 vertices admits
perfect state transfer. We also see the results above as partial steps towards the conjecture.
Unfortunately our attempts to move forward have been unfruitful so far, specially on the
case where the two vertices belong to the same bipartition class.

7.2

Laplacian matrix

Given a graph X, let D = D(X) be the diagonal matrix whose entries are the degrees of
the vertices in X. Recall from Chapter 2 that the Laplacian matrix L = L(X) is defined
as L = D − A.
101

→
→
Suppose each edge e = uv of X is arbitrarily oriented as −
e = (u, v) or −
e = (v, u), and
let N = N (X) be the oriented incidence matrix of X. That is, for some u ∈ V (X) and
e ∈ E(X), we have

→
−

 +1, if e = (v, u) for some v ∈ V (X),
→
Nu,e =
−1, if −
e = (u, v) for some v ∈ V (X),


0,
otherwise.
It follows that N N T = L, and hence L is a positive-semidefinite matrix. For both
results below, we refer to Godsil and Royle [42], Chapter 13.
7.2.1 Theorem. For any graph X with Laplacian matrix L, the following holds.
(i) The number 0 is an eigenvalue for L. Its multiplicity is equal to the number of
connected components of X, and the vector j is always contained in its eigenspace.
(ii) All other eigenvalues of L are positive.
Proof. For (i), it is trivial to notice that Lj = 0. If N is defined as above, Lv = 0 if and
only if N T v = 0. If X is connected that is true if and only if v = j. So the multiplicity of
0 as an eigenvalue of L is equal to the number of connected components of X. For (ii), it
suffices to note that L is positive-semidefinite.
7.2.2 Theorem. Suppose X is a connected graph on n vertices. If λ 6= 0 is such that
L(X)v = λv for some v, then L(X)v = (n − λ)v. As a consequence, λ ≤ n, and equality
holds if and only if X is disconnected.
Proof. The result follows from the fact that L(X) = nI − J − L(X).
Perhaps one of the earliest and most important results regarding the Laplacian matrix
of a graph is Kirchhoff’s Theorem, also called the Matrix Tree Theorem.
7.2.3 Theorem. Let X be a graph, and u any of its vertices. Let L[u] denote the principal
submatrix of L(X) obtained by deleting the row and the column associated to u. Then the
number of spanning trees of X is equal to the determinant of L[u].
102

As a corollary, we have the following.
7.2.4 Corollary. Let X be a graph, 0 = λ1 ≤ ... ≤ λn its Laplacian eigenvalues. Then the
number of spanning trees of X is equal to
n

1Y
λi .
n i=2
When working with the adjacency matrix, interlacing (Theorem 2.1.13) is very useful to
deal with vertex deletion. In the case of the Laplacian matrix, the natural use of interlacing
regards edge-deleted subgraphs. The following theorem is folklore.
7.2.5 Theorem. Let X be a graph, e ∈ E(X). Suppose the eigenvalues of L(X) are
λ1 ≤ ... ≤ λn , and the eigenvalues of L(X\e) are λ01 ≤ ... ≤ λ0n . Then
λi ≥ λ0i ≥ λi−1 .
Proof. Let N and M be such that N N T = L(X), and M M T = L(X\e). Note that M
is obtained from N by removing a column relative to the edge e, and hence M T M is a
principal submatrix of N T N . Because the positive spectra of AAT and AT A are equal for
any matrix A, the result now follows from Theorem 2.1.13.
As a consequence, we have the following.
7.2.6 Corollary. Let X be a tree on n vertices with Laplacian spectrum 0 = λ1 (X) ≤ ... ≤
λn (X). Then λ2 (X) ≤ 1, and equality holds if and only if X is a star, that is, X = K1,n−1 .
Proof. We prove it by induction. If the diameter of X is at most 2, then X is necessarily
a star. If the diameter is at least 3, then |V (X)| ≥ 4, and equal only if X = P4 . Note
√
that λ2 (P4 ) = 2 − 2. We suppose by induction that for all trees Y of diameter at least
3 and such that |V (Y )| < |V (X)|, we have λ2 (Y ) < 1. Let X be such that |V (X)| ≥ 5.
Then there is an edge e such that one of the components of X\e has diameter at least 3.
Let Y be such a component, and so by induction λ2 (Y ) < 1. Note that λ3 (X\e) ≤ λ2 (Y ),
because X\e has two components, and so the multiplicity of 0 is equal to 2. It follows from
Theorem 7.2.5 that λ3 (X\e) ≥ λ2 (X), hence 1 > λ2 (X).
103

Finally, the Laplacian spectrum of K1,n−1 is {0, 1, 1, ..., 1, n − 1} (see Example 1 in
Merris [59]).
Definition. The smallest non-zero Laplacian eigenvalue of X is called the algebraic connectivity of X, and we will denote it by a(X).
We now present an important result regarding the eigenvectors in the eigenspace of
a(T ), where T is a tree. It is a combination of a result due to Fiedler [27, Theorem 3.14]
and of a result due to Merris [59, Theorem 2].
7.2.7 Theorem. Let T be a tree and a(T ) its smallest non-zero eigenvalue. Then there
are two possibilities.
(i) There is at least one eigenvector v of a(T ) such that
U = {u ∈ V (T ) : vu = 0} 6= ∅.
In this case, the subgraph induced by U is connected, and there is only one vertex
w ∈ V (T ) in U which is adjacent to a vertex of T not in U . Moreover, if this holds
for some eigenvector v of a(T ), then it holds for all eigenvectors in the eigenspace of
a(T ), and w does not depend on the choice of the eigenvector.
(ii) If v is an eigenvector for a(T ), and if vu 6= 0 for all u ∈ V (T ), then there is a
unique edge uw of T such that vu > 0 and vw < 0. Moreover, if this holds for some
eigenvector v of a(T ), then it holds for all eigenvectors in the eigenspace of a(T ), and
the vertices u and w do not depend on the choice of the eigenvector.
Vertices u and w as described in the statement of the theorem are called characteristic
vertices of the tree. We can classify trees into those satisfying case (i) of Theorem 7.2.7,
to be called type-I trees; and those satisfying case (ii) of Theorem 7.2.7, to be called typeII trees. In particular, type-I trees are those containing one characteristic vertex only,
whereas type-II trees contain two characteristic vertices.
We also include a result due to Grone, Merris and Sunder.

104

7.2.8 Theorem ([44], Theorem 2.1). Let T be a tree on n vertices, and suppose λ > 1 is
an integer eigenvalue, with a corresponding eigenvector v. Then
(i) λ divides n;
(ii) the multiplicity of λ is 1; and
(iii) no coordinate of v is zero.
To finish this section, we describe the eigenvalues and the eigenvectors of the Laplacian
matrix of paths. The following theorem is folklore.
7.2.9 Theorem. Let α = nπ . The non-zero eigenvalues of L(Pn ) are simple, and for
each k ∈ {1, ..., n − 1}, we have that (2 − 2 cos (kα)) is an eigenvalue with corresponding
eigenvector


− sin(kα)


 sin(kα) − sin(2kα) 


sin(2kα) − sin(3kα) .


..




.
sin((n − 1)kα)

7.3

Continuous-time quantum walk on the Laplacian
matrix

So far we have been considering the quantum walk model where the continuous-time quantum walk is given by eitA , where A is the adjacency matrix of the graph. Recall from
Equation 2.8 that we can also consider the model in which the continuous-time quantum
walk is given by eitL , where L is the Laplacian matrix of the graph. Note that if X is
k-regular, then both models are equivalent, as L = kI − A, and hence eitL = eitk · e−itA .
Because L is a Hermitian matrix, we can use our original definitions of perfect state
transfer and periodicity given in Section 2.4. Throughout this section only, whenever we
use the terms perfect state transfer, periodicity, strongly cospectral and eigenvalue support
105

relative to a graph X and its vertices, we assume that they refer to the Laplacian matrix
of X. Also, in this section only, we will use γ for the phase associated to state transfer,
given that the eigenvalues of L will be represented by λ.
Given a graph X with Laplacian matrix L, we will typically represent the spectral
decomposition of L by
d
X
L=
λr F r .
r=0

The eigenvalue support with respect to the Laplacian of a vertex u in X will be denoted
by Λu .
If u and v are strongly cospectral vertices with respect to the Laplacian, then we define
−
the partiion {Λ+
uv , Λuv } of Λu = Λv by the rule
λr ∈ Λ+
uv ⇐⇒ Fr eu = Fr ev ,

λr ∈ Λ−
uv ⇐⇒ Fr eu = −Fr ev .

We summarize observations about perfect state transfer with respect to the Laplacian
below. Note that this theorem is analogous to Theorem 2.4.4, but stronger in some sense.
We emphasize that conditions (ii) and (iii) will follow from simple observations, but both
are due to the author.
7.3.1 Theorem. Let X be a graph, u, v ∈ V (X). Let λ0 > ... > λk be the eigenvalues in
Λu . Then X admits perfect state transfer with respect to the Laplacian from u to v at time
τ with phase γ if and only if all of the following conditions hold.
(i) Vertices u and v are strongly cospectral with respect to the Laplacian.
(ii) Elements in Λu are all integers.

(iii) Let g = gcd {λr }kr=0 . Then
λr
is even, and
g
λr
b) λr ∈ Λ−
is odd.
uv if and only if
g

a) λr ∈ Λ+
uv if and only if

106

Moreover, if these conditions hold, then
a) There is a minimum time τ0 > 0 such that perfect state transfer with respect to the
Laplacian occurs between u and v, and
τ0 =

π
.
g

b) The time τ is an odd multiple of τ0 .
c) The phase γ is equal to 1.
d) Neither u nor v can be involved in perfect state transfer with respect to the Laplacian
with a third vertex.
Proof. Suppose eiτ L eu = γev . Recall that 0 is an eigenvalue of L with corresponding
eigenvector j. As a consequence, 0 ∈ Λw for all w ∈ V (X). Thus λk = 0. Hence Fk eu =
Fk ev , and then 1 = eiτ λk = γ. Thus eiτ λr = ±1, and so λλrs ∈ Q for all r, s ∈ {0, ..., k}. This
√
only happens if all eigenvalues in Λu are integers, or of the form λr = tr ∆ for integers
√
tr ∈ Z and some square-free ∆ ∈ Z. If tr ∆ is an eigenvalue of L, so is its algebraic
√
conjugate −tr ∆. However L has no negative eigenvalue, hence all eigenvalues in Λu must
be integers.
iτ λr
= −1 if and only if λr ∈ Λ−
Now eiτ λr = 1 if and only if λr ∈ Λ+
uv . A choice
uv , and e
of τ satisfying these equations is possible if and only if condition (iii) holds. The other
assertions of the statement of the Theorem follow from arguments absolutely analogous to
what we did in Chapter 2.

As a remark, note that the stronger statement below follows from the proof above.
7.3.2 Corollary. For any graph X with a periodic vertex u ∈ V (X) with respect to the
Laplacian, the eigenvalues in the eigenvalue support of u with respect to the Laplacian must
be integers.
It is clear now why we introduced the results regarding integral Laplacian spectra in
the last subsection. We present the consequences.
107

7.3.3 Corollary. If a tree T admits perfect state transfer with respect to the Laplacian,
then T contains a unique characteristic vertex (that is, T is a type-I tree).
Proof. No star admits perfect state transfer, so Corollary 7.2.6 implies that 0 < a(T ) < 1.
From Theorem 7.3.1, the eigenvalues in the support of vertices involved in perfect state
transfer must be integers. So T must be a type-I tree by Theorems 7.2.7 and 7.2.7.
7.3.4 Corollary. Except for P2 , no path admits perfect state transfer with respect to the
Laplacian.
Proof. We present two proofs. The direct proof uses Theorem 7.2.9. This result says that
all vertices of Pn , except for the middle vertex when n is odd, are in the eigenvalue support

of 2 − 2 cos πn . But that is not an integer unless n = 2 or n = 3, and it is easy to check
that there is no perfect state transfer with respect to the Laplacian in P3 .
The second proof is more sophisticated and uses Corollary 7.3.3. Suppose Pn is a type-I
tree. Let v be an eigenvector for the eigenvalue a(Pn ). We know that j is an eigenvector of
L(Pn ), hence hv, ji = 0, implying that v has positive and negative entries. From Theorem
7.2.7 (i), there is a vertex w ∈ V (Pn ) such that vw = 0, and the entries of v on every path
starting at w are either increasing, decreasing or are constant. Hence the entries to one
side of w in Pn are positive, and the entries to the other side are negative. In particular,
if Pn is a type-I tree, then only one vertex is not in the support of a(Pn ).
We finish this chapter with a very interesting application of Corollary 7.2.4.
7.3.5 Lemma. Suppose X is a graph on n > 2 vertices admitting perfect state transfer
with respect to the Laplacian between u and v. Then Λu contains at least one non-zero
even eigenvalue, and unless u and v share the same set of neighbours, Λu must contain at
−
least three non-zero eigenvalues. Or, more precisely, |Λ+
uv | ≥ 2 and |Λuv | ≥ 2.
Proof. Let Λu = {λ1 , ..., λk }, and w+ and w− be such that
X
X
w+ =
Fr eu and w− =
Fr eu .
λr ∈Λ−
uv

λr ∈Λ+
uv

108

In particular, eu = w+ + w− and ev = w+ − w− , implying that
1
1
w+ = (eu + ev ) and w− = (eu − ev )
2
2

(7.2)

Consider the situation in which the only even eigenvalue is 0. In view of Theorem 7.3.1,
1
+
that means that only 0 belongs to Λ+
uv , and hence w = n j. Unless n = 2, this contradicts
Equation 7.2.
Likewise, if there is only one eigenvalue belonging to Λ−
uv , its corresponding eigenvector
is going to be equal to a scalar multiple of w− , a situation possible only if u and v share
the same set of neighbours.
7.3.6 Theorem. If X is a graph on an odd number of vertices with an odd number of
spanning trees, then perfect state transfer with respect to the Laplacian cannot happen.
Proof. It follows from Corollary 7.2.4 that X cannot have any even eigenvalue greater
than 0. By Lemma 7.3.5, X cannot admit perfect state transfer with respect to the
Laplacian.
7.3.7 Corollary. No tree on an odd number of vertices admits perfect state transfer with
respect to the Laplacian.
The results in this section suggest that, in some cases, the problem of determining
which graphs admit perfect state transfer with respect to the Laplacian might be easier
than that with the adjacency matrix.
Conjecture 2. Except for P2 , no tree admits perfect state transfer with respect to the
Laplacian.

109

Chapter 8
Future work
This final chapter is split into short sections, each of them containing some partial (yet new)
observations about different aspects related to quantum walks. Our long-term objective is
to develop the theory regarding each of these topics.
Section 8.1 is motivated by the question as to which symmetry properties of a graph can
be observed from the continuous-time quantum walk matrix. Our best result in this section
is obtained by exploring properties of the derivative of U (t), but our work on this topic is
still on a early stage. In Section 8.2, we briefly explore another property of the derivative of
U (t). Section 8.3 contains yet another equivalent definition of strongly cospectral vertices
due to Godsil, and based on that we present some interesting observations. In the last
section, we list some problems motivated by the work in this thesis.

8.1

Symmetries of a graph

Recall that a permutation of the vertices of a graph X is an automorphism if and only if
P T AP = A, where A is the adjacency matrix of X and P is the associated permutation
matrix.
8.1.1 Lemma. Let X be a graph, and u, v, w ∈ V (X). If P is a permutation matrix
110

representing an automorphism of X such that P eu = eu and P ev = ew , then
U (t)u,v = U (t)u,w
for all t.
Proof. Let U (t) = UA (t). Note that UP T AP (t) = U (t), but also
UP T AP (t) = P T U (t)P,
and so
eTv U (t)eu = eTv (P T U (t)P )eu
= (P ev )T U (t)(P eu )
= eTw U (t)eu .

From that, we can derive a simple consequence.
8.1.2 Corollary. If P is an automorphism that fixes every vertex of the graph and swaps
u and v, then if u is involved in perfect state transfer, it must be with v.
In particular, if a graph Y is obtained from a graph X by appending two vertices v and
w of degree 1 adjacent to a vertex u ∈ V (X), then v and w can only be involved in perfect
state transfer with each other. We would like to find a “good” converse of Lemma 8.1.1.
The reason why we are not asking for the proper converse of Lemma 8.1.1 is that it is
simply not true. Any asymmetric distance-regular graph will provide one. However, if we
require a global hypothesis, we obtain the following.
8.1.3 Theorem. Let X be a graph, v, w ∈ V (X). Then U (t)ev = U (t)ew for all t if and
only if there is a permutation matrix P that swaps v and w and fixes all other vertices of
X.

111

Proof. One direction is given by Lemma 8.1.1. Now let A = A(X) and suppose the
eigenvalues of A are θ0 > ... > θd . Consider the matrix U (1). Because the eigenvalues of X
are algebraic integers, eiθi 6= eiθj when i 6= j. So U (1) has d + 1 distinct eigenvalues, and
hence there is a polynomial p(x) of degree at most d such that p(U (1)) = A. Note that for
any integer k, U (1)k = U (k). So the matrices {U (k) : k = 0, ..., d + 1} form a basis for the
algebra spanned by the powers of A. As a consequence of the hypothesis now, Aeu = Aev ,
which is an equivalent statement to what we wanted to prove. Note that the hypothesis
could be strengthened to require U (t)ev = U (t)ew only for a set of d + 1 distinct algebraic
integer values of t, and the same proof would have worked.
A natural question that arises from the theorem above is whether we can characterize
subsets U ⊂ V (X) such that we need only to assume U (t)u,v = U (t)u,w for u ∈ U in the
hypothesis.
In another direction, we show that under an extra hypothesis we can ignore the complex
phase and use only its absolute value.
8.1.4 Theorem. Let X be a graph, having eigenvalues θ0 > ... > θd , and let u, v, w be
vertices. If, for all times t, we have
|U (t)u,v | = |U (t)u,w |,
and, moreover, (i, j) 6= (k, `) implies θi − θj 6= θk − θ` , then, for all t,
U (t)u,v = U (t)u,w .
Proof. The first hypothesis is equivalent to
|eTv U (t)eu |2 = |eTw U (t)eu |2 .
We have
|eTv U (t)eu |2 =
=

d
X

!

d
X

eiθr t (eTv Er eu )

r=0
d
X

X

r=0

r<s

(eTv Er eu )2 + 2

!
e−iθr t (eTv Er eu )

r=0

(eTv Er eu )(eTv Es eu ) cos(t(θr − θs )).

112

Note that this is an analytical function on t ∈ R+ . If two functions are identical, then the
same holds for their derivatives. It follows that
dn T
dn T
2
|ev U (t)eu | = n |ew U (t)eu |2 .
n
dt
dt

(8.1)

If we denote


F (t; r, s) = sin(t(θr − θs )) (eTv Er eu )(eTv Es eu ) − (eTw Er eu )(eTw Es eu ) ,
then Equation 8.1 implies that
X

(θr − θs )n F (t; r, s) = 0

r<s

for all positive odd integers n.
Using now the second hypothesis, and taking sufficiently large n, we can conclude that
for all r, s and for all t,
F (t; r, s) = 0
This is equivalent to
(eTv Er eu )(eTv Es eu ) = (eTw Er eu )(eTw Es eu )
for all r and s.
Comparing such equalities for three indices r, s and q, and given that the projector E0
is a positive matrix, it must be the case that
eTv Er eu = eTw Er eu
for all r, and so
eTv U (t)eu = eTw U (t)eu .

Another way of overcoming the fact that the converse of Lemma 8.1.1 is not true is to
consider a relaxation of the definition of automorphism.
Definition. Given a graph X, A = A(X), an orthogonal matrix Q that commutes with A
is called a symmetry of X.
113

Recall from the end of Chapter 2 that we already considered such matrices. In view of
the theory we build up then, we have the following result.
8.1.5 Corollary. Let X be a graph with vertices u, v and w. Then v and w are cospectral
and U (t)u,v = U (t)u,w for all t if and only if there is a symmetry of X that swaps v and w
but fixes u.
Proof. From Theorem 2.5.1, v and w are cospectral if and only if there is a symmetry Q
such that Q2 = I and Qev = ew . Note that if U (t)u,v = U (t)u,w , then it follows from the
proof of Theorem 8.1.3 that (Er )u,v = (Er )u,w for all r. Hence h{Ak eu }k≥0 i is orthogonal
to h{Ak (ev − ew )}k≥0 i. From the definition of Q, this implies that Qeu = eu .
On the other hand, we have that QT U (t)Q = U (t), and if Q fixes u, we have, for all t,
eTu U (t)ew = (eTu QT )U (t)(Qev ) = eTu (QT U (t)Q)ev = eTu U (t)ev .

8.2

The derivative of U (t)

Recall from Chapter 3 that the Schur product of matrices M and N is entry-wise defined
as (M ◦ N )ab = Mab · Nab . In terms of the Schur product, we can say that a graph X admits
perfect state transfer from u to v if and only if
(U (t) ◦ U (−t))uv = 1.
Note that a necessary condition for this to happen is that the u-th column of the (entrywise) derivative of U (t) ◦ U (−t) is 0. In that direction, we have the following result.
d
8.2.1 Theorem. Let X be a graph, u ∈ V (X). Then (U (t) ◦ U (−t)) eu = 0 if and only
dt
if the restriction of U (t)eu to its non-zero entries is a vector that lies in the kernel of the
adjacency matrix of the subgraph induced by such entries.

114

Proof. First recall that U (t) is a polynomial in t with matrix coefficients, and hence the
derivative of U (t) with respect to t is the matrix whose entries are the derivatives of the
polynomials in t that correspond to the entries of U (t). It is not difficult to see that, after
some re-arrangement, we obtain
d
U (t) = iAU (t).
dt
Now, by the product rule,
d
(U (t) ◦ U (−t)) = (iAU (t)) ◦ U (−t) + U (t) ◦ (−iAU (−t))
dt
= (iAU (t)) ◦ U (−t) + (iAU (t)) ◦ U (−t).
But recall that this is a real matrix, hence the u-th column is 0 if and only if


(iAU (t)) ◦ U (−t) eu = 0.
That is true if and only if (iAU (t)eu ) ◦ (U (−t)eu ) = 0, which in turn is equivalent to
AU (t)eu and U (t)eu having disjoint supports. Let Y be the subgraph induced by the
vertices whose corresponding entry in U (t)eu is non-zero. Then AU (t)eu and U (t)eu have
disjoint supports if and only if the restriction of U (t)eu to Y is an eigenvector of Y with
eigenvalue 0.
From that, we derive two more intelligible corollaries.
8.2.2 Corollary. Let X be a graph, u ∈ V (X). If the support of U (t)eu is an independent
d
set of X, then (U (t) ◦ U (−t)) eu = 0.
dt
d
8.2.3 Corollary. Let X be a graph, u ∈ V (X). If
(U (t) ◦ U (−t)) eu = 0, then the
dt
subgraph of X spanned by the support of U (t)eu must have the eigenvalue 0.

8.3

Other properties of strongly cospectral vertices

The main question inspiring this section is to determine what is the maximum size of a
subset of the vertices of a graph that are pairwise strongly cospectral.
115

We would have liked the answer of this question to be 2, but (unpublished) computations carried by Fidel Barrera-Cruz found some examples of regular graphs on few vertices
containing a set of 3 vertices that are pairwise strongly cospectral. We then turn our attention to answering the problem by finding an upper bound. The following lemma generalizes
a (unpublished) result due to Godsil.
8.3.1 Lemma. Let X be a graph on n vertices with eigenvalues {θr }dr=0 . Let {u1 , ..., uk } ⊂
V (X), and ei the characteristic vector of ui . If these vertices are parallel, then for all
eigenvalues θr of X with multiplicity mr , the multiplicity of θr in X\{u1 , ..., uk } is at least
mr − 1.
Proof. Let Sr be the eigenspace of A(X) associated to θr . These vertices are parallel if
and only if, for all r ∈ {0, ..., d}, the subspace
Tr = span {Er ei }ki=1
has dimension at most 1. This is equivalent to saying that the quotient subspace Sr /Tr has
dimension at least mr − 1. But this subspace is isomorphic to a subspace of the eigenspace
of θr in the matrix A(X\{u1 , ..., uk }).
This lemma directly implies the best known bound for the maximum size of a subset
of the vertices of a graph that are parallel with the same eigenvalue support, in particular
it is the best answer we have for the question motivating this section.
8.3.2 Theorem. Given a vertex u in X, the maximum number of vertices that are parallel
to u and whose eigenvalue support is contained in the eigenvalue support of u is at most
equal to the size of the eigenvalue support of u.
We now introduce a different approach, partly based on the following results due to
Godsil [40]. We will use the notation M ◦2 = M ◦ M .
8.3.3 Lemma. Given a graph X with eigenvalues {θr }dr=0 , and u, v ∈ V (X), we have that
u and v are strongly cospectral if and only if, for all r, Er ◦2 eu = Er ◦2 ev .
Proof. It follows trivially from observing that Er ◦2 eu = Er eu ◦ Er eu .
116

8.3.4 Theorem ([40], Theorem 9.3). If λr > 0 for all r, then vertices u and v are strongly
cospectral if and only if
d
X

λr Er ◦2 (eu − ev ) = 0.

(8.2)

r=0

Proof. If u and v are strongly cospectral, Lemma 8.3.3 trivially implies Equation 8.2.
For the converse, note that the matrix Er is positive-semidefinite, hence by Schur’s
Theorem ([64], Theorem VII), we have that Er ◦2 is positive-semidefinite. As a consequence,
(eu − ev )T Er ◦2 (eu − ev ) ≥ 0. From Equation 8.2,
(eu − ev )

T

d
X

λr Er ◦2 (eu − ev ) = 0,

r=0

thus (eu − ev )T Er ◦2 (eu − ev ) = 0 for all r. Hence
[(Er )u,u ]2 + [(Er )v,v ]2 − 2[(Er )u,v ]2 = 0.

(8.3)

Given that Er ◦2 is a positive-semidefinite matrix, and hence a Gram matrix, the CauchySchwarz inequality implies that
[(Er )u,u ]2 [(Er )v,v ]2 − [(Er )u,v ]4 ≥ 0.

(8.4)

Equations 8.3 and 8.4 imply that
[(Er )u,u ]2 = [(Er )v,v ]2 = [(Er )u,v ]2 .
Recall that Er is an idempotent, hence (Er )u,v = hEr eu , Er ev i. Therefore, by CauchySchwarz again, we have, for all r,
Er eu = ±Er ev .

117

Recall from Chapter 6 that for each graph X with d + 1 distinct eigenvalues, we can
define a sequence of orthogonal polynomials p0 (x), ..., pd (x) with respect to the trace inner
product. Theorem 6.1.2 implies that
d
X
1

mr
r=0

Er ⊗ Er =

d
X

1
p (A) ⊗ pr (A).
2 r
tr
p
(A)
r
r=0

(8.5)

Therefore:
8.3.5 Theorem. Given a graph X, vertices u and v, and orthogonal polynomials p0 (x), ..., pd (x),
it follows that u and v are strongly cospectral if and only if
d
X

1
p (A) ◦ pr (A) (eu − ev ) = 0.
2 r
tr
p
(A)
r
r=0

Proof. Follows from Theorem 8.3.4, Equation 8.5, and the fact that for any matrix M ,
M ◦ M is a submatrix of M ⊗ M .
We believe that this theorem might provide a good way of testing whether two vertices are strongly cospectral, or in bounding how many vertices can be pairwise strongly
cospectral. We believe this is even more strongly in the context of association schemes or
coherent configurations, where the matrices pr (A) have a combinatorial meaning.

8.4

Compilation of problems

Problem 1. Characterize which trees admit perfect state transfer with respect to the
adjacency matrix.
Problem 2. Characterize which trees admit perfect state transfer with respect to the
Laplacian matrix.
In Chapter 7, we showed some advance in both problems above. All of our results
indicated classes of trees in which perfect state transfer cannot happen, and so we conjectured that the answer to the first problem might be P2 and P3 only, whereas for the second
problem that would be P2 only.
118

Problem 3. Characterize the translation graphs that admit perfect state transfer.
Our work on association schemes in Chapter 3, on products in Chapter 4 and on two
classes of translation graphs in Chapter 5 can be seen as a partial progress towards solving
the problem above. The problems below are also inspired by our work in Chapter 5.
Problem 4. Find an efficient way of checking whether a cubelike graph (Zd2 , C) with
P
g∈C g = 0 admits perfect state transfer.
Problem 5. Find more examples of cubelike graphs admitting perfect state transfer at
arbitrarily small times.
Problem 6. Find a more elementary proof of Theorem 5.2.2.
In the other sections of this chapter, we motivated the problems below.
Problem 7. Find a “good” converse for Lemma 8.1.1.
Problem 8. To what extent can the seemingly unnatural hypothesis on the differences of
the eigenvalues in Theorem 8.1.4 be weakened?
Problem 9. What is the maximum size of a subset of the vertices of a graph that are
pairwise strongly cospectral?
Finally, we state a problem somewhat related to the problem of determining which
trees admit perfect state transfer.
Problem 10. If X is a graph of diameter d, what is the minimum number of edges (as a
function of d) needed to achieve perfect state transfer between vertices at distance d ?

119

References
[1] William Adamczak, Kevin Andrew, Leon Bergen, Dillon Ethier, Peter Hernberg, Jennifer Lin, and Christino Tamon. Non-uniform mixing of quantum walk on cycles. Int.
J. Quantum Inf., 05(06):781–793, 2007. 77
[2] Amir Ahmadi, Ryan Belk, Christino Tamon, and Carolyn Wendler. On mixing in
continuous-time quantum walks on some circulant graphs. Quantum Inf. Comput.,
3(6):611–618, 2003. 77
[3] R. J. Angeles-Canul, R. M. Norton, M. C. Opperman, C. C. Paribello, M. C. Russell,
and C. Tamon. Perfect state transfer, integral circulants, and join of graphs. Quantum
Inf. Comput., 10(3-4):325–342, 2010. 12
[4] Ricardo Javier Angeles-Canul, Rachael M. Norton, Michael C. Opperman, Christopher C. Paribello, Matthew C. Russell, and Christino Tamon. Quantum perfect state
transfer on weighted join graphs. Int. J. Quantum Inf., 7(08):1429–1445, 2009. 12
[5] R. Bachman, E. Fredette, J. Fuller, M. Landry, M. C. Opperman, C. Tamon, and
A. Tollefson. Perfect state transfer on quotient graphs. Quantum Inf. Comput., 12(34):293–313, 2012. 12, 42
[6] R. A. Bailey. Association Schemes. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004.
54
[7] Milan Bašić, Marko D. Petković, and Dragan Stevanović. Perfect state transfer in
integral circulant graphs. Appl. Math. Lett., 22(7):1117–1121, 2009. 12, 80
120

[8] Milan Bašić. Characterization of quantum circulant networks having perfect state
transfer. Quantum Inf. Process., 12(1):345–364, 2013. 12, 80
[9] A. Bernasconi, C. Godsil, and S. Severini. Quantum networks on cubelike graphs.
Phys. Rev. A (3), 78(5):052320, 5, 2008. 11, 76
[10] J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty. Graph Theory. Springer, New York, 2008. 13
[11] Sougato Bose. Quantum communication through an unmodulated spin chain. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 91:207901, Nov 2003. 10
[12] W. G. Bridges and R. A. Mena. Rational g-matrices with rational eigenvalues. J.
Combin. Theory Ser. A, 32(2):264 – 280, 1982. 80
[13] A. E. Brouwer, A. M. Cohen, and A. Neumaier. Distance-Regular Graphs. SpringerVerlag, Berlin, 1989. 36, 38, 39, 45, 47, 50, 52, 55
[14] A. E. Brouwer and W. H. Haemers. Spectra of Graphs. Universitext. Springer, New
York, 2012. 13
[15] A. E. Brouwer, J. H. Koolen, and M. H. Klin. A root graph that is locally the line
graph of the Petersen graph. Discrete Math., 264(13):13 – 24, 2003. 73
[16] William Carlson, Allison Ford, Elizabeth Harris, Julian Rosen, Christino Tamon,
and Kathleen Wrobel. Universal mixing of quantum walk on graphs. Quantum Inf.
Comput., 7(8):738–751, 2007. 77
[17] A. Chan. Complex Hadamard Matrices, instantaneous uniform mixing and cubes.
ArXiv e-prints, May 2013. 77
[18] W. Cheung and C. Godsil. Perfect state transfer in cubelike graphs. Linear Algebra
Appl., 435(10):2468–2474, 2011. 11, 76
[19] M. Christandl, N. Datta, A. Ekert, and A. J. Landahl. Perfect state transfer in
quantum spin networks. Phys. Rev. Lett., 92:187902, May 2004. 3, 10, 11, 18

121

[20] Matthias Christandl, Nilanjana Datta, Tony C. Dorlas, Artur Ekert, Alastair Kay,
and Andrew J Landahl. Perfect transfer of arbitrary states in quantum spin networks.
Phys. Rev. A, 71(3):032312, 2005. 3, 11, 13, 18, 60
[21] G. Coutinho, C. Godsil, K. Guo, and F. Vanhove. Perfect state transfer on distanceregular graphs and association schemes. ArXiv e-prints, January 2014. 12, 36, 40, 42,
50, 55
[22] David A. Cox. Galois Theory. Pure and Applied Mathematics (Hoboken). John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, second edition, 2012. 20
[23] Gabriel Cramer. Introduction a l’Analyse des Lignes Courbes Algebriques. Chez les
Freres Cramer & Cl. Philibert, 1750. 33
[24] C. Dalfó, E. R. van Dam, M. A. Fiol, E. Garriga, and B. L. Gorissen. On almost
distance-regular graphs. J. Combin. Theory Ser. A, 118(3):1094–1113, 2011. 83
[25] Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet and Richard Dedekind. Vorlesungen über Zahlentheorie von PG Lejeune Dirichlet. Vieweg und Sohn, 1871. 22
[26] E. Farhi and S. Gutmann. Quantum computation and decision trees. Phys. Rev. A
(3), 58(2):915–928, 1998. 1, 10
[27] Miroslav Fiedler. A property of eigenvectors of nonnegative symmetric matrices and
its application to graph theory. Czech. Math. J., 25(4):619–633, 1975. 104
[28] M. A. Fiol. Algebraic characterizations of distance-regular graphs. Discrete Math.,
246(1-3):111–129, 2002. 87
[29] M. A. Fiol and E. Garriga. From local adjacency polynomials to locally pseudodistance-regular graphs. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B, 71(2):162–183, 1997. 83
[30] M. A. Fiol, E. Garriga, and J. L. A. Yebra. Locally pseudo-distance-regular graphs.
J. Combin. Theory Ser. B, 68(2):179–205, 1996. 89

122

[31] Yang Ge, Benjamin Greenberg, Oscar Perez, and Christino Tamon. Perfect state
transfer, graph products and equitable partitions. Int. J. Quantum Inf., 9(3):823–842,
2011. 12, 58, 59, 69
[32] Heath Gerhardt and John Watrous. Continuous-time quantum walks on the symmetric
group. In Approximation, randomization, and combinatorial optimization, volume
2764 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 290–301. Springer, Berlin, 2003. 77
[33] C. Godsil. Periodic graphs. Electron. J. Combin., 18(1):Paper 23, 15, 2011. 12, 40,
48
[34] C. Godsil. When can perfect state transfer occur?
23:877–890, 2012. 11, 28

Electron. J. Linear Algebra,

[35] C. D. Godsil. Inverses of trees. Combinatorica, 5(1):33–39, 1985. 99
[36] C. D. Godsil. Algebraic Combinatorics. Chapman & Hall, New York, 1993. 41, 84, 88
[37] C. D. Godsil and A. D. Hensel. Distance regular covers of the complete graph. J.
Combin. Theory Ser. B, 56(2):205 – 238, 1992. 43, 44, 45, 47, 48
[38] C. D. Godsil and B. D. McKay. Spectral conditions for the reconstructibility of a
graph. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B, 30(3):285–289, 1981. 33
[39] Chris Godsil. State transfer on graphs. Discrete Math., 312(1):129 – 147, 2012. 12
[40] Chris Godsil. Average mixing of continuous quantum walks. J. Combin. Theory Ser.
A, 120(7):1649–1662, 2013. 116, 117
[41] Chris Godsil, Natalie Mullin, and Aidan Roy. Uniform mixing and association schemes.
ArXiv e-prints, 2013. 77
[42] Chris Godsil and Gordon Royle. Algebraic Graph Theory. Springer-Verlag, New York,
2001. 13, 43, 44, 55, 71, 102
[43] Chris D. Godsil and John Shawe-Taylor. Distance-regularised graphs are distanceregular or distance-biregular. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B, 43(1):14–24, 1987. 88
123

[44] Robert Grone, Russell Merris, and V. S. Sunder. The Laplacian spectrum of a graph.
SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 11(2):218–238, 1990. 105
[45] Brian C. Hall. Quantum Theory for Mathematicians. Springer, New York, 2013. 13
[46] Richard Hammack, Wilfried Imrich, and Sandi Klavžar. Handbook of Product Graphs,
Second Edition (Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications). CRC Press, 2nd edition,
2011. 63, 68
[47] G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright. An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, sixth edition, 2008. 20
[48] M. A. Jafarizadeh and R. Sufiani. Perfect state transfer over distance-regular spin
networks. Phys. Rev. A, 77:022315, Feb 2008. 12
[49] M. A. Jafarizadeh, R. Sufiani, S. F. Taghavi, and E. Barati. Optimal transfer of a dlevel quantum state over pseudo-distance-regular networks. J. Phys. A-Math. Theor.,
41(47):475302, 2008. 12
[50] Mohamad Ali Jafarizadeh, Rahime Sufiani, Maryam Azimi, and Faghiheh Eghbali
Fam. Perfect state transfer over interacting boson networks associated with group
schemes. Quantum Information Processing, 11(1):171–187, 2012. 12
[51] A. Kay. Basics of perfect communication through quantum networks. Phys. Rev. A,
84(2), 2011. 11, 31
[52] Alastair Kay. Perfect state transfer: Beyond nearest-neighbor couplings. Phys. Rev.
A, 73(3):032306, 2006. 11
[53] Alastair Kay. Perfect, efficient, state transfer and its application as a constructive
tool. Int. J. Quantum Inf., 8(04):641–676, 2010. 12
[54] Phillip Kaye, Raymond Laflamme, and Michele Mosca. An Introduction to Quantum
Computing. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2007. 13
[55] V. M. Kendon and C. Tamon. Perfect state transfer in quantum walks on graphs. J.
Comput. Theor. Nanos. 12
124

[56] M. Koppinen. On dualization of double Frobenius algebras.
26(11):3669–3690, 1998. 86

Comm. Algebra,

[57] Guang-Siang Lee and Chih-wen Weng. A spectral excess theorem for nonregular
graphs. J. Combin. Theory Ser. A, 119(7):1427–1431, 2012. 83
[58] W. J. Martin, M. Muzychuk, and J. Williford. Imprimitive cometric association
schemes: constructions and analysis. J. Algebraic Combin., 25(4):399–415, 2007. 51
[59] Russell Merris. Characteristic vertices of trees. Linear Multilinear A., 22(2):115–131,
1987. 104
[60] Cristopher Moore and Alexander Russell. Quantum walks on the hypercube. In
Randomization and approximation techniques in computer science, volume 2483 of
Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 164–178. Springer, Berlin, 2002. 77
[61] S. E. Payne and J. A. Thas. Finite Generalized Quadrangles. EMS Series of Lectures
in Mathematics. European Mathematical Society (EMS), Zürich, second edition, 2009.
55
[62] Marko D. Petković and Milan Bašić. Further results on the perfect state transfer in
integral circulant graphs. Comput. Math. Appl., 61(2):300 – 312, 2011. 12, 80
[63] Nitin Saxena, Simone Severini, and Igor E Shparlinski. Parameters of integral circulant
graphs and periodic quantum dynamics. Int. J. Quantum Inf., 5(03):417–430, 2007.
12
[64] J. Schur. Bemerkungen zur theorie der beschränkten bilinearformen mit unendlich
vielen veränderlichen. Journal für die reine und Angewandte Mathematik, 140:1–28,
1911. 117
[65] Edwin R. van Dam. The spectral excess theorem for distance-regular graphs: a global
(over)view. Electron. J. Combin., 15(1):Research Paper 129, 10, 2008. 83
[66] Luc Vinet and Alexei Zhedanov. Dual-1 hahn polynomials and perfect state transfer.
In Journal of Physics: Conference Series, volume 343, page 012125. IOP Publishing,
2012. 12
125

[67] Luc Vinet and Alexei Zhedanov. How to construct spin chains with perfect state
transfer. Phys. Rev. A, 85(1):012323, 2012. 12
[68] Jiang Zhou, Changjiang Bu, and Jihong Shen. Some results for the periodicity and
perfect state transfer. Electron. J. Combin., 18(1):Paper 184, 7, 2011. 84

126

Index
(n, r, c)-covers, 40
2-adic norm, see p-adic norm
p-adic norm, 20
r-fold covering, 39

continuous-time quantum walk, 17
cospectral vertices, 29
covering graph, 39
cubelike graph, 70

adjacency matrix, 11
algebraic conjugates, 18
algebraic connectivity, 99
algebraic integer, 17
algebraic number, 17
antipodal distance-regular graphs, 35
antipodal vertices, 87
association scheme, 32

direct product, 49, 58
distance graphs, 34
distance matrices, 34
distance-regular graph, 34
double cover, 66
dual degree, 83

bipartite double, 49, 66
Bose-Mesner algebra, 33
cartesian product, 54
Cayley graph, 70
character, 70
characteristic vertices, 99
circulant graph, 75
code
binary linear, 71
centre of, 71
codewords, 71
connection set, 70

eccentricity, 83
eigenvalue support, 23
equitable partition, 38, 83
feasible parameter sets, 35
fibres, 35
flat matrix, 72
Hadamard matrix, 41
imprimitive distance-regular graph, 35
interlacing, 14
intersection array, 34
intersection numbers
of the graph, 35
of the scheme, 33
127

Laplacian matrix, 17, 96
lexicographic product, 63
local inner product, 84

walk matrix, 29
walk module, 83
weight of a codeword, 71

parallel vertices, 29
perfect state transfer, 16, 20
periodic
vertex, 21
Perron eigenvalue, 14
Perron eigenvector, 14
phase, 20
primitive distance-regular graph, 35
quadratic integer, 19
qubit, 1
Schur
idempotents, 33
product, 33
spectral decomposition, 12
spectrally extremal, 83
strong graph product, 63
strongly cospectral, 23
strongly regular graphs, 38
switching graph, 66
symmetry of a graph, 108
trace product, 80
type-I trees, 100
type-II trees, 100
uniform mixing, 72
walk generating function, 29
128

