arXiv:math/0109191v1 [math.CO] 24 Sep 2001

A HEAWOOD–TYPE RESULT FOR THE ALGEBRAIC
CONNECTIVITY OF GRAPHS ON SURFACES
PEDRO FREITAS
Abstract. We prove that the algebraic connectivity a(G) of a graph embedded on a nonplanar surface satisfies a Heawood–type result. More precisely, it
is shown that the algebraic connectivity of a surface S, defined as the supremum of a(G) over all graphs that can be embedded in S, is equal to the
chromatic number of S. Furthermore, and with the possible exception of the
Klein bottle, we prove that this bound is attained only in the case of the
maximal complete graph that can be embedded in S. In the planar case, we
show that, at least for some classes of graphs which include the set of regular
graphs, a(G) is less than or equal to four. As an application of these results
and techniques, we obtain a lower bound for the genus of Ramanujan graphs.
We also present some bounds for the asymptotic behaviour of a(G) for
certain classes of graphs as the number of vertices goes to infinity.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been some work relating the spectral radius of the
adjacency matrix of a graph, r(G), to its genus – see [EZ, Ho1, Ho2]. The idea
behind these results is to combine an appropriate estimate for r(G) in terms of the
number of vertices and edges of the graph, with a direct consequence of Euler’s
formula giving an upper bound for the number of edges of a graph embedded in a
surface S. This allows the derivation of a bound for r(G) in terms on the number
of vertices of G and the genus of S.
In the continuous case there is also a relation between the eigenvalues of a certain
differential operator and the genus of that surface. More precisely, there exist upper
bounds for the first nontrivial eigenvalue of the Laplace-Beltrami operator on a
surface in terms of its genus. The first of these results was obtained by Hersch
for the case of the sphere [He], and this was later generalized by Yang and Yau to
orientable surfaces of genus γ:
Theorem 1.1. [YY] Let S be an orientable surface of genus γ and let λ denote
the first nontrivial eigenvalue of the Laplace–Beltrami operator on S. Then
λ≤

8π(1 + γ)
,
A(S)

where A(S) denotes the area of S.
Note that in the case of general manifolds of dimension greater than two, it is
known that no such results are possible [U].
Date: August 18, 2021.
Key words and phrases. Algebraic connectivity, Heawood numbers, genus of a graph.
Partially supported by FCT, Portugal.
1

2

PEDRO FREITAS

These results suggest the derivation of similar bounds for the first nontrivial
eigenvalue of the Laplacian operator defined on graphs. This quantity is related to
the connectivity of a graph G, and was thus christened the algebraic connectivity
of G, a(G), by Fiedler [F].
The main purpose of this paper is to study the maximum possible value of
a(G) for a graph which can be embedded on a surface of genus γ. It turns out
that this value is equal to the Heawood number which appears in graph colouring
problems [GT, RY, WB]. Our main result is that for surfaces of positive genus
this maximum possible value is given by the algebraic connectivity of the maximal
complete graph that is possible to embed on such a surface and that, with the
possible exception of the Klein bottle, this value is attained only for this graph – see
Section 3 for details. An immediate consequence is that the algebraic connectivity
of a graph of genus γ is bounded from above by the chromatic number of Sγ . In a
sense, this is a surprising result since the algebraic connectivity and the chromatic
number are not intimately related in general – see Section 6.
As in the case of map colouring problems, the techniques used to prove the result
in the case of positive genus do not apply to the case of the sphere, and so this
remains an open problem. We are, however, able to obtain some results under some
restrictions which include the case of planar regular graphs. These are presented
in Sections 4 and 5.
In Section 7 we show how the results of the paper can be used to obtain estimates
for the genus of some graphs. In particular, we apply this to the case of Ramanujan
graphs.
These results show that the maximum value of the algebraic connectivity on
a given surface is attained for a finite number of vertices. However, it is also of
interest to know how a(G) behaves as the number of vertices becomes large. A first
step in this direction is done in Section 8 where we consider the supremum of the
algebraic connectivity of certain classes of graphs on a surface of fixed genus as the
number of vertices goes to infinity.
Finally, in Section 9 we consider some open problems and present some conjectures.
2. Preliminaries
2.1. Notation. We begin by reviewing some concepts from graph theory that will
be used in what follows. Let G be a simple n−vertex graph (n ≥ 3), that is,
a graph with n vertices and no loops nor multiple edges, and denote the sets of
vertices and edges by V and E, respectively. We also denote the number of edges,
|E|, by e. The degree di of a vertex is the number of edges having that vertex as
one end, and the smallest and the largest of these numbers will be denoted by dmin
and dmax , respectively. The vertex connectivity v(G) is defined as the minimal
number of vertices whose removal (together with their adjacent edges) results in a
disconnected graph. The girth of a graph is the length of the shortest cycle in the
graph.
The adjacency matrix A of a graph G is defined by
n

A = {aij }i,j=1
where aij equals one if there is an edge connecting vertices i and j, and zero
otherwise.

ALGEBRAIC CONNECTIVITY OF GRAPHS ON SURFACES

3

The Laplacian of a graph is defined to be the matrix L = D − A, where D is
the diagonal matrix diag(d1 , . . . , dn ). For some basic properties of this and related
operators see, for instance, [Ch, CdV, F]. The eigenvalues of the Laplacian will be
denoted by
0 = λ1 ≤ λ2 ≤ . . . λn .

The second eigenvalue λ2 is normally denoted by a(G), and is called the algebraic
connectivity of the graph.
As far as we are aware, the best bounds for a(G) depending only on the number
of vertices and of edges of a graph remain those given by Fiedler in [F]. The bound
from that paper which will be of interest here is contained in the following
Theorem 2.1. [F] Let G be a simple, connected, n−vertex graph with e edges and
which is not complete. Then
2e
a(G) ≤ v(G) ≤ dmin ≤ .
n
2.2. Graphs on surfaces. In what follows a surface S is a compact connected
2−manifold. From the classification of surfaces, we have that S is either homeomorphic to a sphere with h handles in the orientable case, or to the connected sum
of k projective planes in the non–orientable case. In this context, it is usual to
denote the former by Sh and the latter by Nk . The genus γ(S) of a surface S is
defined to be 1 − χ(S)/2, where χ(Sh ) = 2 − 2h and χ(Nk ) = 2 − k is the Euler
characteristic of the surface. Whenever a statement applies in both the orientable
and non–orientable cases, we shall refer to the surface of genus γ by Sγ , without
stating explicitly which case is being considered.
An important aspect of topological graph theory is the study of whether or not it
is possible to embed a graph in a given surface. We say that there is an embedding
of a graph G in a surface S, if there exist a one–to–one mapping of V onto a set of
n distinct points in S, and a mapping from E to disjoint open arcs in S, such that
no point in the image of V is contained in the image of an edge, and the image of
an edge joining two vertices is an arc joining the corresponding images – see [WB]
for this and other related concepts. If a graph G is embedded in a surface S, then
the set S \ G consists of a collection of connected components which are called the
faces of G. If all the faces of an embedding are homeomorphic to an open disk
the graph is said to be cellularly embedded in S, and the embedding is called a
2−cell embedding. The orientable (non–orientable) genus of a graph is defined to
be the smallest possible genus of an orientable (resp. non–orientable) surface where
G is embeddable. We shall refer to the orientable Euler characteristic of a graph
as the Euler characteristic of the orientable surface corresponding to the genus of
the graph, and similarly for the non–orientable Euler characteristic. Where there
is no danger of confusion, or when a result applies in both cases, we shall refer only
to the genus or to the Euler characteristic of a graph, without stating explicitly
whether it refers to the orientable or non–orientable case.
The chromatic number of a surface S, κ(S), is the maximum chromatic number
of all graphs which can be embedded in S. In an analogous way, we define the
algebraic connectivity of a surface as
A(S) = sup a(G),
G∈G(S)

where G(S) is the set of all graphs that can be embedded in S.

4

PEDRO FREITAS

Another question of interest is the study of the asymptotic behaviour of a(G) for
families of graphs embedded in a surface as the number of vertices goes to infinity.
Given an infinite family F of graphs embeddable on a surface S we define the
asymptotic algebraic connectivity of S by


∞
AF (S) := sup lim sup a(Gn ) ,
n→∞

where Gn ∈ F , |Gn | = n, and the supremum is taken over all possible such sequences – when F = G(S), we omit the subscript and write A∞ (S).
2.3. Auxiliary results. The basic result that allows us to relate the algebraic connectivity of a graph embedded in a surface to its genus is the following consequence
of Euler’s formula:
Theorem 2.2. Let G be a simple, connected, n−vertex graph with e edges and
girth g(≥ 3). If G is embeddable in a surface S with characteristic χ, then
g
[n − χ] .
e≤
g−2

For a proof see, for instance, [WB].
Combining this with Theorem 2.1 yields the following result, which will be used
in the sequel.
Corollary 2.3. Let G be a non–complete graph of Euler characteristic χ. Then
2g n − χ
a(G) ≤
.
g−2 n

We will also need a relation between the vertex connectivity of a graph and its
genus. This is given by the following theorem, due to Cook.
Theorem 2.4. [Co] Let G be a graph of nonpositive Euler characteristic χ. Then
$
%
p
5 + 49 − 24χ
v(G) ≤ C(Sγ ) :=
.
2
As mentioned in [PZ], this still holds in the case of the projective plane (non–
orientable genus one). Cook has improved this result when G does not contain
triangles. Here we shall only make use of this in the planar case.
Theorem 2.5. [Co] Let G be a planar graph of girth g. Then

 5 if g = 3,
3 if g = 4, 5,
v(G) ≤

2 if g ≥ 6.

Finally, let S be a surface of genus γ. Then the maximal complete graph of genus
γ, which we denote by K γ , is the complete graph on the largest possible number
of vertices that can be embedded in S.
A theorem of Ringel and Youngs gives the orientable genus of complete graphs.
Theorem 2.6. [RY] The orientable genus of the complete graph Kp (p ≥ 3) is
given by


(p − 3)(p − 4)
.
γ(Kp ) =
12

ALGEBRAIC CONNECTIVITY OF GRAPHS ON SURFACES

5

In the case of non–orientable genus, the corresponding result is due to Ringel.
Theorem 2.7. [R] The non–orientable genus of the complete graph Kp (p ≥ 3) is
given by


(p − 3)(p − 4)
,
γ(Kp ) =
6
with the exception of K7 for which we have γ(K7 ) = 3.
3. A Heawood–type result for the algebraic connectivity
The main theorem of the paper is the following
Theorem 3.1. Let G be a graph of genus γ and nonpositive Euler characteristic
χ. Then a(G) ≤ a(K γ ). More precisely, and with the exception of the Klein bottle
(non–orientable genus two), we have that
$
%
p
7 + 49 − 24χ
γ
a(G) ≤ a(K ) = H(S) :=
,
2
with equality if and only if G = K γ
In the case of the Klein bottle, we have that a(G) ≤ a(K γ ) = a(K6 ) = 6 <
H(S) = 7.
For planar graphs, a(G) ≤ 5.
The number H(S) is Heawood’s number for the surface S, and is related to the
chromatic number of a surface – see [GT], for instance. As was pointed out in the
Introduction, there is a great similarity between this result and the corresponding
result for the colouring of graphs known as the Heawood map–colouring problem.
In fact, a straightforward corollary to this theorem is that the algebraic connectivity
of a graph of genus γ is bounded from above by the chromatic number κ(Sγ ).
Corollary 3.2. Let G be a nonplanar graph of genus γ. Then a(G) ≤ κ(Sγ ).
Furthermore, if G 6= K γ then a(G) ≤ a(K γ ) − 1, except possibly in the case of the
Klein bottle.
In terms of the algebraic connectivity of a surface, this may be stated as follows.
Corollary 3.3. For any surface S of positive genus γ we have that
γ

A(S) = κ(S).

Furthermore, if G 6= K is a graph embedded on a surface S, then a(G) ≤ A(S)−1,
except possibly in the case of the Klein bottle.
Proof of Theorem 3.1. Combining Theorem 2.4 with Fiedler’s bound we have that
for a nonplanar orientable graph G
a(G) ≤ v(G) ≤ C(S) = H(S) − 1.
On the other hand, we have from Theorem 2.6 that for each value of γ the complete
graph KH(S) , can be embedded in Sγ . Since KH(S) = H(S), we have that for
noncomplete graphs
a(G) ≤ C(S) = H(S) − 1 = a(KH(S) ) − 1,
which proves the result, as well as the second part of Corollary 3.2.

6

PEDRO FREITAS

In the planar case the maximum possible vertex connectivity is five, and thus
a(G) ≤ 5.
In the non–orientable case, and for γ larger than two, we proceed in a similar
way to obtain the result for noncomplete graphs, now using Theorem 2.7.
For the projective plane (γ = 1), the result follows in the same way by using the
fact that Theorem 2.4 extends to this case, and that the maximal complete graph
is now K6 .
In the case of the Klein bottle (γ = 2), we have that the maximal complete
graph that can be embedded there is K6 . From Theorem 2.4 we obtain that for
noncomplete graphs a(G) ≤ v(G) ≤ C(2) = 6 = a(K6 ), proving the result in this
case.
4. Planar graphs
We will begin by obtaining some bounds on the algebraic connectivity which
apply to general graphs. The main argument which will be used is a bound based on
a test function similar to that used in the proof of Cheeger’s inequality – see [CdV],
for instance. The idea is that it should be possible to improve on bounds based
on v(G) in cases where there are clusters of vertices for which a sufficient large
number of the edges join vertices within the cluster. In order to do this, we need
the following definition.
Definition 4.1. Let G be a graph and H be a proper nonempty subset of V (G),
formed by the vertices yi , i = 1, . . . , m. The degree of the subset H, is defined as
m 

X
di − d˜i ,
d(H) =
i

where d˜i is the number of edges joining two vertices yi and yj , 1 ≤ i, j ≤ m.

Lemma 4.2. Let G be a graph on n vertices and let H be a proper nonempty subset
of V (G) with m vertices and degree d(H). Then
a(G) ≤

d(H)n
.
m(n − m)

Proof. By the variational formulation for the eigenvalues of G, we have that
X
2
[f (x) − f (y)]
(4.1)

a(G) ≤

x∼y

X

f 2 (x)

,

x∈G

for all f such that
n
X

f (xi ) = 0,

i=1

and where x ∼ y denotes that the vertices x and y are adjacent. Let f : V → R be
defined by
 n
m − 1, x ∈ H
f (x) =
−1,
x ∈ G \ H.

ALGEBRAIC CONNECTIVITY OF GRAPHS ON SURFACES

7

We then have that f is orthogonal to the vector with all entries equal to 1, and
thus, by (4.1), it follows that

a(G) ≤
=

=

 n 2
d(H)
2m
n
−1 +n−m
m
m
d(H)n2
 2

n
m2
−n
m
d(H)n
.
m(n − m)

Theorem 4.3. Let G be a planar graph with dmax smaller than or equal to five.
Then a(G) ≤ 4.
Proof. If G does not have a triangle, then by Theorem 2.5 a(G) ≤ 3. Assume thus
that G has a triangle T . Then d(T ) ≤ 3 × 5 − 6 = 9 and hence, from Lemma 4.2,
it follows that
a(G) ≤

3n
.
n−3

We thus have that a(G) > 4 implies n < 12. On the other hand, for a planar graph
to have a(G) greater than four, it must have dmin equal to five. Since dmax is less
than or equal to five, from Theorem 2.2,
n
X
i=1

di = 5n = 2e ≤ 6(n − 2),

and we obtain that for this to happen the graph must have at least twelve vertices.

5. Regular graphs
Since for planar graphs dmin is less than or equal to five, Theorem 4.3 implies
that for planar regular graphs a(G) is less than or equal to four. We shall now
consider the restriction to some particular cases of regular graphs.
We begin by obtaining a general bound for regular graphs (not necessarilly planar) of a given girth.
Theorem 5.1. Let G be a regular graph of girth g smaller than n and Euler characteristic χ. Then
a(G) ≤


gχ 
2n
2−
.
(n − g)(g − 2)
n

8

PEDRO FREITAS

Proof. Take H in Lemma 4.2 to correspond to the cycle Cg . Then d(H) = g(d − 2)
and
(d − 2)n
a(G) ≤
n−g
e − 1 n
= 2 n
n−g


g (n − χ)
n
≤ 2 g−2
−
1
n
n−g
=



gχ
2
n
2
−
n
n − g.
g−2

Note that for a fixed girth and sufficiently large n this is better than Corollary 2.3
which is obtained from Fiedler’s bound.
In the case of planar graphs χ equals two and this bound takes the following
simple form.
Corollary 5.2. Let G be a regular planar graph of girth g smaller than n. Then
4
a(G) ≤
.
g−2
When the girth is equal to n, we have the case of 2−regular graphs (the cycle Cg )
for which it is easy to see that, with the exception of K3 , the algebraic connectivity
is always less than or equal to two, this value being attained for the cycle C4 . A
similar result holds for planar cubic graphs.
Theorem 5.3. Every planar cubic graph other than K4 has
a(G) ≤ 2.
Proof. If the girth g is larger than or equal to four, the result follows from the
bound in Corollary 5.2. Assume thus that g equals three. Then G has a triangle
and proceeding as in the proof of Theorem 4.2 but now using the fact that the
degree is three, we obtain that
n
.
a(G) ≤
n−3
This will be greater than two provided that n is less than 6. Since we are interested
in cubic graphs, the case of n equal to five is excluded and the only cubic graph
when n equals four is K4 .
The result is sharp, in the sense that the bound is attained by both the 3−prism
and the cube graphs.
6. Algebraic connectivity and chromatic numbers
In general, and without any further assumptions, we cannot expect a deep relation between a(G) and κ(G), in the sense that there exist graphs for which
a(G) < κ(G) (any connected graph with a(G) less than two), graphs for which
a(G) = κ(G) (complete graphs), and graphs for which a(G) > κ(G) (any complete
bipartite graph Kp,q with p and q both greater than two). However, it is possible
to prove the following

ALGEBRAIC CONNECTIVITY OF GRAPHS ON SURFACES

9

Theorem 6.1. Let G be a noncomplete graph on n vertices and with chromatic
number κ(G). Then


n
.
a(G) ≤ n −
κ(G)
Proof. The graph G can be divided into subsets Xi , i = 1, . . . , κ(G), such that
there are no edges connecting vertices within each set Xi . This means that the
complementary graph of G, Gc , contains the complete graphs Kni , where ni =
|Xi |, i = 1, . . . κ(G). We also have that at least one of the numbers ni is greater
than ⌈n/κ(s)⌉ and, since G is not complete, greater than one. Hence


n
λn (Gc ) ≥
,
κ(G)
from which the result follows, since a(G) ≤ n − λn (Gc ).
In the special case of bichromatic graphs of a given Euler characteristic it is
possible to improve on this result.
Theorem 6.2. If G is a graph on n vertices with κ(G) = 2 and Euler characteristic
χ, then
a(G) ≤ 4

n−χ
.
n

Proof. Since G is bichromatic, its girth must be greater than three. The result now
follows from Corollary 2.3.
As a consequence, we obtain that bichromatic planar graphs satisfy a(G) < 4.
However, in this case it is possible to obtain a better bound using Theorem 2.5
Theorem 6.3. If G is a bichromatic planar graph, then a(G) ≤ 3.
Proof. It follows as before but now using Theorem 2.5 instead of Corollary 2.3.
It is, of course, also possible to use the results in [Co] for the case of general
orientable genus and where the graph’s girth is greater than or equal to four to
obtain further bounds for bichromatic graphs. However, these will not be as good
as those in Theorem 6.2, at least for γ larger than one and sufficiently large n.
In general, bichromatic graphs can have an arbitrarilly high algebraic connectivity, as can be seen from the case of the complete bipartite graph Kp,q , for which
κ(Kp,q ) equals two, while a(Kp,q ) = min{p, q}. Note that when p equals q this
gives equality in the case of Theorem 6.1.
On the other hand, it is also possible to keep a(G) bounded while making the
chromatic number as large as desired. To see this, consider the graph G obtained
from Kn by adding a vertex which is connected to one single vertex in Kn , that is,
G = (Kn−1 ∪{x})+̇K1 . The spectrum of this graph is given by (0, 1, n, . . . , n, n+1)
(and thus a(G) = 1), while its chromatic number grows with n.
These two examples show that unless we impose an extra restriction such as
fixing the genus of the graph, we should not expect a close relation between the
algebraic connectivity and the chromatic number of a graph.

10

PEDRO FREITAS

7. A lower bound for the genus of Ramanujan graphs
It is possible to use the bounds in Corollary 3.2 to obtain estimates for the genus
of a given graph, provided one has a lower bound for a(G) – this is actually just a
consequence from the fact that a(G) is less than or equal to C(S). Here we apply
this to the case of Ramanujan graphs – see [Ch, LPS].
Theorem 7.1. Let G be a Ramanujan graph on n vertices and of degree d, with
9 ≤ d 6= n − 1. Then its orientable genus satisfies
'
&
√
(2d − 4 d − 1 − 5)2 − 1
.
γ≥
48
Proof. The algebraic connectivity of a Ramanujan graph satisfies (see [Ch], page
97, for instance)
√
a(G) ≥ d − 2 d − 1.

Since by Corollary 3.2 the algebraic connectivity of a noncomplete graph which can
be embedded on a surface S satisfies
it follows that

a(G) ≤ a(K γ ) − 1 = H(S) − 1 = C(S),
p
√
49 − 24χ ≥ 2d − 4 d − 1 − 5.

From this we see that if d is smaller than 9 then nothing can be concluded, while
for d greater than or equal to 9 we obtain the desired result.
A similar result can be obtained for the case of the nonorientable genus in the
same way, except that then one has to consider the exceptional case of genus two
separately.
8. Asymptotic behaviour of a(G)
From Corollary 3.2 we have that the algebraic connectivity of a graph embedded
in a surface S is bounded from above independently of the number of vertices
of the graph and, in fact, if S is neither the sphere nor the Klein bottle, then
A∞ (S) ≤ A(S) − 1. A better bound for A∞ (S) is given by Corollary 2.3 which
yields that A∞ (S) is less than or equal to 6, independently of S.
On the other hand, by considering the sequence of (planar) double wheel graphs,
that is, Gn = Cn +̇2K1 , for which
a(Gn ) = min {a(Cn ) + 2, a(2K1 ) + n} = min {4 − 2 cos(2π/n), n} ,

we obtain that A∞ (S) is greater than or equal to two and so we have that
2 ≤ A∞ (S) ≤ 6.

We shall now restrict our attention to certain classes of graphs. An immediate
consequence of Theorem 5.1 is a bound for the asymptotic connectivity of regular
graphs with a given fixed girth g.
Theorem 8.1. Let Gr,g (S) be the set of all regular graphs with girth equal to a
fixed number g that can be embedded in a given surface S. Then
4
.
A∞
Gr,g (S) ≤
g−2

ALGEBRAIC CONNECTIVITY OF GRAPHS ON SURFACES

11

Note that the dependence of the bound in Theorem 5.1 is not monotonic in g and
so we cannot obtain directly a uniform bound which would allow us to conclude
that the asymptotic connectivity of regular graphs is less than or equal to four.
However, it is possible to prove this combining Theorem 5.1 with Corollary 2.3.
Theorem 8.2. Let Gr (S) be the set of all regular graphs that can be embedded in
S. Then
A∞
Gr (S) ≤ 4.
Proof. If g is equal to three, Theorem 5.1 gives that


3χ
4n − 6χ
2n
2−
=
.
a(G) ≤
n−3
n
n−3

On the other hand, if the girth is larger than three, then by Corollary 2.3 it follows
that
4(n − χ)
.
a(G) ≤
n
Since both bounds converge to four as n goes to infinity, the result follows.

Combining this with a bound of Alon and Boppana, we obtain the following bound
for the specific case of d−regular graphs for a fixed integer d.
Corollary 8.3. For a given integer d greater than or equal to two, let G d (S) denote
the set of d−regular graphs that can be embedded in S. We have that

√
d − 2 d − 1, d ≤ 10
A∞
(S)
≤
d
G
4,
d > 10.
Proof. From a result by Alon and Boppana quoted in [A] – see also [Ch] –, we have
that for a d−regular graph
√
a(G) ≤ d − 2 d − 1 + O(logd n)−1 ,
√
from which it follows that A∞
G d (S) ≤ d − 2 d − 1. This is smaller than four for d
smaller then or equal to 10. For d larger than 10, we use the bound from Theorem 8.2.
9. Discussion
As in the proof of Theorem 4.3, we see that for a(G) to be greater than four then
a planar graph must have at least twelve vertices, since this is a condition for the
minimum degree of a planar graph to be equal to five. We thus have that a(G) ≤ 4
both when n is smaller than twelve or when dmax is smaller than or equal to five.
Both this and the similarity with colouring problems suggest that part of Theorem 3.1 extends to planar graphs, that is, that the maximal algebraic connectivity
of a planar graph is four, the algebraic connectivity of K4 , but we haven’t been able
to prove it. However, if that is the case, then the maximal algebraic connectivity
will not be uniquely attained in this case, since the octahedron (the join of 2K1
with the cycle on four vertices, 2K1 +̇C4 ), has as its spectrum (0, 4, 4, 4, 6, 6). We
have the following conjecture
Conjecture 1. If G is a planar graph, then a(G) ≤ 4, with equality if and only if
G = K4 or G = 2K1 +̇C4 . Furthermore, if G is neither of these graphs, then a(G)
is less than or equal to three.

12

PEDRO FREITAS

Regarding chromatic numbers, note that κ(2K1 +̇C4 ) is three, and so it is possible to have a planar graph whose chromatic number is three while its algebraic
connectivity equals four, although if the conjecture above holds, then this will be
the only graph for which this will happen.
As we have seen, for bichromatic planar graphs we must have that a(G) can be
at most three. In fact, we conjecture that this value can be improved.
Conjecture 2. Every planar bichromatic graph has a(G) ≤ 2.
In the case of the Klein bottle, and since it is possible to have equality between
C(N2 ) and a(K6 ), we have not been able to prove that equality holds only for the
complete graph K6 . However, we believe this to be the case.
Conjecture 3. For the Klein bottle (the non–orientable case of genus two), a(G)
is 6 if and only if G = K6 .
Finally, regarding the upper bound for the asymptotic algebraic connectivity in
the general case, we remark that this is most likely far from being optimal, since
we have used methods which are based mainly on local properties of graphs. We
conjecture that the value of the asymptotic algebraic connectivity in the general
case is independent of the (fixed) surface S, and that it will in fact be equal to two,
the algebraic connectivity of the double wheel graph.
Conjecture 4. A∞ (S) ≡ 2.
References
[A]
[Ch]
[CdV]
[Co]
[EZ]
[F]
[GT]
[He]
[Ho1]
[Ho2]
[LPS]
[PZ]
[R]
[RY]
[U]
[WB]

N. Alon, Eigenvalues and expanders, Combinatorica 6 (1986), 83–96.
F. R. K. Chung, “Spectral graph theory”, CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics, 92, A.M.S., Providence, RI, 1997.
Y. Colin de Verdière, Spectres de graphes, Cours Spécialisés, Société Mathématique de
France, Paris, 1998.
R. J. Cook, Heawood’s theorem and connectivity, Mathematika 20 (1973), 201–207.
M. N. Ellingham and X. Zha, The spectral radius of graphs on surfaces, J. Combin. Theory
Ser. B 78 (2000), 45–56.
M. Fiedler, Algebraic connectivity of graphs, Czechoslovak Math. J. 23 (98) (1973),
298–305.
J. L. Gross and T. W. Tucker, “Topological graph theory”, John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 1987.
J. Hersch, Quatre propriétés isopérimétriques de membranes sphériques homogènes, C.R.
Acad. Sci.Paris Sér. A-B 270 (1970), A1645–A1648.
Y. Hong, Upper bounds of the spectral radius of graphs in terms of genus, J. Combin.
Theory Ser. B 74 (1998), 153–159.
Y. Hong, On the spectral radius and the genus of graphs, J. Combin. Theory Ser. B 65
(1995), 262–268.
A. Lubotzky, R, Phillips and P. Sarnak, Ramanujan graphs, Combinatorica 8 (1988),
261-277.
M. D. Plummer and X. Zha, On the connectivity of graphs embedded in surfaces, J.
Combin. Theory Ser. B 72 (1998), 208–228.
G. Ringel, Bestimmung der Maximalzahl der Nachbargebiete auf nichtorientierbaren
Flächen, Math. Ann. 127 (1954), 181–214.
G. Ringel and J. W. T. Youngs, Solution of the Heawood map-coloring problem, Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 60 (1968), 438–445.
H. Urakawa, On the least positive eigenvalue of the Laplacian for compact group manifolds, J. Math. Soc. Japan 31 (1979), 209–226.
A. T. White and L. W. Beineke, Topological graph theory, in “Selected topics in graph
theory”, L.W. Beineke and R.J. Wilson, eds., 15–50, Academic Press, New York, 1978.

ALGEBRAIC CONNECTIVITY OF GRAPHS ON SURFACES

[YY]

13

P. C. Yang and S.-T. Yau, Eigenvalues of the Laplacian of compact Riemannian surfaces
and minimal submanifolds, Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa 7 (1980), 55–63.

Departamento de Matemática, Instituto Superior Técnico, Av.Rovisco Pais, 1049-001
Lisboa, Portugal.
E-mail address: pfreitas@math.ist.utl.pt

